T
CHAPTER ONE
STEP 1
Question Every Requirement
O  BE  THE  world’s leading automaker, Tesla needed China, both to make
cars and to sell them. This was no mystery. China was already the
biggest auto market in the world. And with its powerful supply chains and
skilled workers, we had no doubt that a Tesla factory in China would
quickly become our most efficient auto plant. Strategically, a Chinese
factory was essential.
But there was one problem. The Chinese demanded equity participation
in foreign-owned plants. Global manufacturers were eager enough for a
foothold in the Chinese market that they readily accepted the condition.
General Motors, Microsoft, Airbus, and Volkswagen, among many others,
had joint ventures in China. If Tesla built a plant, it seemed that Elon would
have to make room for a government-sanctioned partner.
Elon didn’t want any part of it. He sent me to Beijing in 2015 with
instructions to negotiate a 100 percent Tesla-owned manufacturing plant in
China.
He was following the first step of the Algorithm, which is to question
every requirement. Rules and regulations can be changed or, in some cases,
defied. Each rule, as Elon saw it, limits possibilities, hobbling innovation
and boxing in growth. Although in some cases, Elon’s zeal in this area can
blind him to the value of certain regulations, it never hurts to question them.
When you have a large organization, things that started out as good
ideas can become rules, and then those rules can become requirements. So
when constrained by rules, we investigate. With a bit of digging, we’d find
that what appeared at first to be requirements often turned out to be
recommendations, customs, or conventions. Laws had to be obeyed
(especially the laws of physics), but not all requirements were laws, and not
all of them came from governments. Some of them came from suppliers,
telling us what we could and couldn’t do with a piece of equipment. But
when we drilled down, those instructions were often just what an engineer
at that company simply viewed as reasonable, or a best practice. It was not
a hard-and-fast rule.
Sometimes, one of our engineers would insist that a new approach was
dangerous. Of course we took this seriously—but questioned it at the same
time. Were the engineers right? Did they have data to back up their claim?
A corporate culture expands its possibilities if it looks at every “no” as a
potential “yes.” This can lead to all kinds of breakthroughs, both big and
small.
Elon trusted that we’d find a way around the Chinese edict concerning
foreign ownership. It was a rule that gave the Chinese government more
control. Importantly, it also gave the government rights to the revenue
derived from its ownership. But Tesla needed all the cash flow from that
market to survive against much larger and better-funded competitors.
From Elon’s point of view, there was no reason that Chinese officials
couldn’t make an exception. My assignment was to find a way for them to
make a big one.
Upon landing in Beijing, I met with my colleagues there. Robin Ren, a
Shanghai native who went to the University of Pennsylvania with Elon,
headed Tesla’s operations in China. Tom Zhu, an engineer, ran Tesla’s retail
business in the country. And Grace Tao, formerly a news anchor in the
country, ran government relations. This was an incredible team. They knew
the language and the culture, they had critical relationships, and they laid
out for me the Chinese government’s priorities. The government wanted job
growth above all. We could promise lots of jobs. We also had to know what
the Chinese were hungry for. The government’s recently unveiled five-year
plan seemed custom-made for Tesla. It called for development in our core
specialties: electric vehicles, batteries, and clean energy. We headed into
negotiations with a powerful hand.
I flew over for about a week every month. There were many
negotiations in offices, as well as over meals and copious drinks into the
night. The process took fourteen months, but we finally won the go-ahead
for the first 100 percent foreign-owned auto plant in China. (We retained all
of the financial ownership, although the Chinese people, as stipulated by the
1949 Communist Revolution, retained formal ownership of the land the
plant would be built on.)
We achieved what no other Western company was able to do—not
Apple, not GM, not Ford, not Procter and Gamble. The Tesla China entity
would be able to control its own cash flow, without profit sharing, and help
to fund the electric vehicle revolution globally.
Zhu oversaw the building of our mammoth plant, Gigafactory Shanghai.
The first Model 3s started rolling off its lines in late 2019 (just after I had
left the company).
The success in China seemed to prove Elon’s point that even with the
most firmly established norms, there can be exceptions.
The laws of physics, he’ll admit, are a lot less flexible. Yet at the same
time, even seemingly physical constraints can be challenged. The
semiconductor industry has been nudging against atomic limitations for
more than half a century. At the same time, it’s all too easy to use physics as
an excuse. Think of unsuccessful aviators in the nineteenth century. After
failing to hoist their contraptions into the air, they could shrug their
shoulders and say, “Well, you can’t fight gravity.”
But the right machines could fight gravity. Many of the biggest
breakthroughs come from questioning and probing rules that appear
ironclad, and quite a few of them are disguised as physical or chemical
limitations.
This was on my mind one summer afternoon in California. I was with
Doug Field, our head of engineering. We were on the walkway, looking
down on our immense Fremont assembly plant, with its more than 5 million
square feet. The daunting mandate we faced was to cut half of our
manufacturing costs. This was urgent, Elon said, for Tesla to win in world
markets—especially in China, the biggest and most competitive of them all.
Half of the giant space Doug and I were looking at was occupied by the
body shop. This is where legions of robots weld some three hundred parts
into the main supporting structure of the car, the chassis. The robots alone
represented more than half of our capital costs. And even in a factory
dominated by robots, labor costs remained stubbornly high. In the struggle
to keep all the machines in sync, our team of robotics engineers was putting
in lots of overtime.
The challenge was to keep scores of robots working in concert. That
created immense complexity, which led to problems. Tiny delays or a
simple communication gaffe between two machines could throw off the
entire process. This created chronic quality issues, like gaps between doors
and frames.
The body shop was a drain on productivity further down the assembly
line. This was an area I’d focused on decades before meeting Elon and
learning about the Algorithm. Back when Dave Goldberg and I were
consulting in the Iowa meatpacking business, we worked with a plant
manager whose mentor at MIT—an Israeli professor named Eli Goldratt—
was writing a book on precisely the production issues we were struggling
with. Goldratt was sending the chapters as he wrote them to the plant
manager in Storm Lake, Iowa. The plant manager gave them to Goldie and
me.
Goldratt’s book was called The Goal, and it was transformative. It
helped us simplify complex problems by zeroing in on constraints. The key,
Goldratt wrote, was to hunt for bottlenecks in the industrial process. Why?
Because a process cannot go faster than its slowest step. That is the
constraint. And it has to be eliminated for the process to speed up.
The telltale sign of a constraint is a pileup of inventory at one stage or
another. Each bottleneck requires a fix. Some are simple, others anything
but. The very process of focusing on what isn’t working well, and fixing it,
leads to dramatic gains in performance. It trains your attention on what
matters while also eliminating complexity. The continuous-improvement
process known as Kaizen, developed in the last century by Toyota, works
on similar principles.
One thing about simplicity is that it travels well. Simple, compelling
concepts, such as “Hunt down constraints and fix them,” work in practically
any human endeavor.
After adopting Goldratt’s methodology, the Storm Lake plant quickly
became the most productive and profitable in the company. By applying its
lessons to other plants, Goldie and I became known as the manufacturing
guys at Bain.
Goldratt’s philosophy fit neatly into Elon’s Algorithm, especially the
focus on simplicity and bottlenecks. But what to do when half of the entire
manufacturing process, the body shop, is one enormous bottleneck?
I asked Doug if there would be any way to eliminate that entire side of
production, and all the costs and quality issues associated with it.
He gazed at the operations in the body shop for a while. Then he said,
“Let me go home and think about this.”
The next day he came in and rolled a Matchbox car across the table. He
turned the tiny model over and showed us the bottom. Unlike our cars, its
body featured a single part. It was cast, with liquid metal injected into a
mold. The Matchbox car was made from just two casts, top and bottom.
That’s how Mattel could manufacture the toys for a couple of bucks.
Everyone knew, of course, that toy cars could be cast. It was just a few
drops of molten metal. But full-size cars were a different story altogether.
From the earliest days of manufacturing, automakers had always insisted on
welding the big and heavy components. Welds, they believed, were stronger
and could absorb more energy in a crash.
Casting was used only for small components. To attempt casting larger
parts seemed foolhardy—and dangerous. Even a splatter of liquid metal can
kill or severely injure a worker. The tremendous heat generated by large
casts of molten metal could conceivably crack or even explode the molds. It
was this very real fear that kept automakers from experimenting with large
casts. Anyone who dared to challenge the common wisdom ran the risk of a
deadly inferno.
Yet a lot had changed since Henry Ford’s day. The sciences had
advanced tremendously, from metallurgy to robotics. So maybe things that
used to be impossible, even unthinkable—like casting a chassis—weren’t so
far-fetched.
Doug was aware of developments in casting in the steel industry. For a
full century, the industry had poured tons of molten steel into ingots or,
later, thick slabs. That metal then was flattened into sheets. It was an
expensive and time-consuming process.
In the late 1980s, executives at the fast-growing steel company Nucor,
of Charlotte, North Carolina, moved to eliminate a big step in the process.
Their idea was to pour the molten steel into a new type of caster, one that
would process it directly into sheet steel. This seemed counterintuitive. At
nearly 3,000 degrees Fahrenheit, molten steel is unruly. It laps and bubbles.
But the Nucor team, working with a German machine maker, the SMS
Group, succeeded. Their flat-casting approach gave them a jump on the
industry. The technology is now standard at companies around the world.
It was clear to Doug, as he rolled the Matchbox car on the table and
made his case, that big pieces could be cast. It was really just a matter of
figuring out how to do it.
So we experimented. In the back of the factory was a pile of aluminum
wheel rims that had been rejected for scratches. We asked a couple of
engineers to melt them in a small smelter. Right away, Doug and his team
were able to cast pieces that were a lot bigger than the toy car. Our
experiments continued, producing larger and larger pieces until, finally, we
cast our first chassis parts.
The process worked better than we could have dreamed. We began to
build plants in Shanghai and in Austin with big casters in place of the body
shop. Our chassis required only three parts, down from three hundred. This
greatly simplified everything from the supply chain to quality control. Not
only was it cheaper, but production volume also increased, and quality
became more consistent.
As I write this, there’s a global shortage of this casting machinery.
Whereas Tesla has equipped its factories with new casters, its competitors
are still waiting to get their hands on one as they scramble to catch up.
This single innovation gave our team a five- to seven-year jump on the
rest of the industry. It brought an end to the chronic delays and quality
issues. We accomplished this by getting rid of the body shop and its robots
altogether.
This casting example powerfully illustrates the first step of the
Algorithm: Question every requirement. Doug questioned the century-old
norms of requiring a body shop in a car factory. But like so many of the
case studies in this book, this one demonstrates other steps of the Algorithm
—such as eliminating steps and simplifying processes—that work together.
They not only create efficiencies and breakthroughs but also build a culture
of questioning and experimentation.
When Doug came up with his radical and potentially dangerous idea, he
understood that he would not be laughed at or belittled for it—and that if he
made a good case, he’d have the freedom to develop it. That is essential to
the culture at Tesla.
This freedom is also essential for innovation and hypergrowth. It’s
understood and accepted that a certain percentage of these efforts will come
up short. After all, only by failing can we be sure that we’re pushing far
enough into the realm of the possible.
SOMETIMES, “IMPOSSIBLE” MEANS “UNSOLVED”
Two years before joining Tesla, I was having trouble sleeping. Like many
parents, I was worried about my teenager, who was about to get his driver’s
license. I pictured my sixteen-year-old son behind the wheel, hearing a buzz
and reaching for his phone. This scenario led to visions, all of them
horrifying. Distracted driving accounted for more highway deaths than
alcohol. I was anxious to protect my son, along with everyone in his orbit,
from friends in the car to children chasing a ball into the street.
There had to be an app, I figured, to disable a driver’s phone. It was
something millions of parents wanted, so it seemed to be a no-brainer. But
when I looked into it, I found that no such app existed. When the Apple
iPhone was new, I learned, there had been discussions of the very
technology I wanted.
Steve Jobs foresaw how much the passengers in a car would be relying
on their phones for navigation, messaging, and entertainment. He asked if
there was a way to disable the driver’s messaging without interfering with
the passengers’ phones. He was told that GPS was accurate to only ten
meters (thirty feet). That meant it wasn’t possible to pinpoint which phone
in a car belonged to the driver, so Apple couldn’t solve the problem.
Passengers were free to enjoy their phones, and it would be up to the drivers
to exercise healthy restraint. That had parents like me tossing and turning at
night.
The accepted conclusion that the problem was unsolvable functioned
like an ironclad rule or regulation: You can’t do that.
I hadn’t yet been introduced to the Algorithm, but I understood the value
of questioning every rule and requirement, every constraint. When there’s a
consensus that something is impossible, breakthroughs can happen.
I kept at it. There had to be a way, I figured, to identify the driver’s
phone and lock down all other functions, save for navigation, while the car
was moving. I talked to technologists and insurance executives. They gave
me little reason for hope. They had considered GPS and RFID (radio-
frequency identification) tags. There were all kinds of ideas, but none
involved the precision to identify the driver’s phone.
The problem was vexing. The driver gets into the car and places the
phone in a cup holder. The passenger does the same. How could a software
app distinguish between the two? A close friend, David Pratt at Progressive,
told me that a lab at Stanford had worked on the problem for a while but
finally gave up, concluding that the solution “does not exist.”
The apparent impossibility had turned the challenge into a de facto rule:
It cannot be done. This rule was as clear—and apparently as
incontrovertible—as the Chinese dictate against 100 percent foreign-owned
factories or the engineering norm that large chassis components could not
be cast.
With the Algorithm, we challenge assumptions, asking why, again and
again, in search of a solution. It doesn’t always lead to anything. But my
chances would improve if I enlisted smart people in the hunt.
Luckily, I had access to lots of brainpower. I was mentoring at Harvard’s
entrepreneurship center, called the iLab. On a pitch night, I met a team led
by Brad Cordova, a physics PhD candidate from MIT. I asked Brad if he
was interested in working on my problem. He agreed, and we joined forces.
Brad considered those two phones in the cup holders, one belonging to
the driver, the other to the passenger. What was different about those
phones? When they were lined up next to each other, very little.
He wondered if there was anything prior to landing in their places in the
car that distinguished one phone from the other. Were their pathways at all
different? This is when he came up with a brilliant observation.
Using motion sensors in the phones, he mapped their respective courses
into the car. Here he saw a decisive and distinguishing pattern. Drivers
getting into the car had to maneuver their bodies behind the steering wheel.
This gave their movement a distinct signature. We could use it to identify
the driver and lock down all other functions on their phone, except
navigation, when the vehicle started moving or when it reached a certain
speed. We could also gamify driving and reward drivers with cheaper car
insurance for not texting or browsing while driving.
This solution was elegant. It did not rely on GPS or a third-party device,
and it didn’t require data that might infringe on the driver’s privacy.
We promptly patented the technology and named it TrueMotion. I
showed it to Dave Pratt, who was leading the effort at Progressive to create
insurance based on an individual’s behavior. Instead of the traditional
metrics, such as age and driving records, his team was looking for ways to
profile drivers based on how they actually drove.
Dave immediately saw the potential for our technology. Yes, it could
enable the app to lock down the driver’s phone during a journey, but it
could also do much more. Once an insurer determines which phone belongs
to the driver, the phone could provide a stream of behavioral data. The
insurer could offer discounts to drivers who opted in to this surveillance.
And doing it through a phone app was a lot easier and cheaper. It also
scaled much better than installing monitors, one by one, on the cars of
willing customers. It is a model that Tesla now uses in its own insurance
business. The company can harvest minute-by-minute data from every one
of the cars in its global network. This process enables it to gauge risk with
unprecedented precision.
One afternoon, Dave got a group of Progressive’s top executives to walk
out to the parking lot and watch a demonstration of our technology. They
tried many ways to foil it but failed. They left the parking lot excited about
all the possibilities. A few weeks later, Progressive became our very first
customer.
We soon merged TrueMotion with a more established company,
Cambridge Telematics. Now the technology is used broadly in the insurance
industry to score the risk of individual drivers. It makes note of many
factors, including the number of times per trip that the phone distracts the
driver.
This lifesaving innovation was born from questioning a single
constraint: the inability to identify the driver’s phone with accuracy. The
Algorithm shows us very clearly that each constraint is an opportunity.
One thing I love about this example is how Brad Cordova approached
the problem. He pictured the two phones sitting side by side in the cup
holders, and instead of drilling down into the use of each phone, he
considered a different approach. By analyzing their separate pathways into
the car, he was thinking differently. This is a key to innovation and is
essential at every step of the Algorithm.
CORK: A BUSINESS HIDING BEHIND A 25-PAGE PDF
One telltale sign of an industry in need of optimization is the one-size-fits-
all phenomenon. If there are forms or procedures that work for everyone, or
in every scenario, there’s an excellent chance that somewhere along the line
people have opted for convenience over precision. This can spell
opportunity.
I came across a startling case of one-size-fits-all when approving
expenditures at two very different companies, the retailer Lululemon and
the car-sharing platform Lyft.
The issue was cyber-insurance. Approving funding for it is usually a
routine line item at board meetings. It generates minimal discussion.
Everyone is aware that cyberattacks can deliver costly, embarrassing, and
even lethal blows to an enterprise. So the expense, it’s assumed, is the cost
of doing business in a networked world teeming with bad actors.
That said, I came out of a board meeting at Lululemon a few years ago
with sticker shock. The premium for cyber-insurance was $7 million. I
remember wondering why Lululemon had to pay so much. Like many
retailers, the company did not store customer banking or credit-card data.
Upon every purchase, the sensitive data traveled straight to a processing
platform called Stripe, where it was encrypted. The retailer never even saw
it. Companies like Stripe certainly needed gold-plated cyber-insurance. But
Lulu? Not so much.
My instinct at this stage was to follow step 1 of the Algorithm and to
question every requirement, especially ones that cost millions of dollars.
But I was crazy busy and didn’t have time for an exploratory dive into the
nitty-gritty of cyber-insurance.
A few weeks later, I flew to San Francisco for a board meeting at Lyft.
The line item for cyber-insurance came up. I remember thinking that if Lulu
had to pay $7 million, Lyft would likely have to spend multiples of that.
Unlike Lulu, Lyft hosted a valuable trove of customer data: bank-account
numbers, credit cards, passports, IDs. Every minute of every day, hundreds
of bad actors were probing Lyft’s defenses. If they gained access, they’d
spoof the customers’ identities and drain their bank accounts. Facing this
malicious bunch, Lyft needed serious insurance.
Yet to my shock, Lyft’s bill was exactly the same as Lulu’s, $7 million.
Was this a one-size-fits-all industry?
I turned to Brian Roberts, Lyft’s chief financial officer at the time, and
asked him how this could be. “Lyft’s a honeypot,” I said. “Lulu is not.”
He explained the primitive workings of cyber-insurance to me.
Customers had to fill out a form, in this case a twenty-five-page PDF. Much
like workers-comp insurance, it grouped companies by various metrics,
from revenue to the size of their workforce. Because Lulu and Lyft fit into
the same employee-count grouping, they paid the same premium, despite
their dissimilar risk profiles. Cyber-insurance, Brian told me, “is not a
sophisticated tech product.”
Right away, I started to think about disrupting the industry for cyber-
insurance. It looked like a perfect project for DVx, my start-up incubator.
Our initial point of reference was TrueMotion. Although we had
launched it in an effort to discourage distracted driving, our telematics
provided insurers with a tool for monitoring driving behavior and assessing
risk. It bested traditional insurance techniques, such as grouping people by
age, education, and driving records, because it drew data from the very
source of the risk, the driver’s behavior inside the car.
What would be the equivalent for cyber-insurance? Where could we find
and monitor risky behavior? What was the equivalent of being “inside the
car” for cyber risk?
Two of my DVx team members, Michael Rossiter and David
Fetherstonhaugh, spent a couple of months digging into the cyber-insurance
industry. “We saw that as cyberattacks increased,” Michael recalls, “the
premiums went up, and the coverage decreased.” Other newcomers,
including Coalition and Corvus (later acquired by the Travelers
Companies), were already getting a lot of buzz and landing big venture
rounds. “We were wondering if we’d missed the boat,” Michael says.
Yet these companies used noninvasive external scans to assess risk.
They had no access to their customers’ software stack, which was the
hackers’ target. In a sense, they were like Victorian doctors who never had
their patients strip naked.
Some enterprises, no doubt, had stout defenses in place. Others were
like digital Swiss cheese. But we wouldn’t be able to assess each company’s
risk without getting into their stack and exploring.
We scoured our potential customer base, but could find no one eager to
let our start-up burrow into their tech-stack crown jewels, both in
intellectual property and customer data, looking for vulnerabilities. As they
saw it, opening their digital doors to newcomers made them more
vulnerable, not less. If they let us in, others could follow.
We met every two weeks for a full year to grapple with this challenge.
What we needed was software that probed the vulnerabilities of a corporate
software stack from the inside. Ideally, it would function like the light-
sensitive dyes that doctors inject in blood vessels to highlight blockages and
irregularities.
Once we pinpointed the vulnerabilities, we could help companies defend
them. But only if we managed to get inside the stacks. The road, it seemed,
was blocked. Our foray into cyber-insurance could have ended here. There
were plenty of other opportunities.
Yet as we did market research, we spotted a vast and largely unserved
sector: small and medium-size businesses. Many of these enterprises, from
law firms to fitness centers, were highly vulnerable. They had valuable
customer data and all the associated dangers. But the same insurers who
couldn’t even discriminate between Lululemon and Lyft had little idea how
to quantify the risk in this sprawling and unruly sector. They assumed it was
risky, so they turned away from it.
Consequently, hundreds of thousands of small and medium-size
businesses were unprotected. Their digital assets, from customer data to
confidential emails and valuable intellectual property, were largely
uninsured. If they were cyberattacked or victimized by ransomware, they’d
have to come up with the money from their own pockets.
Most of the enterprises in this sector, we learned, outsourced system
security to companies known as MSPs (managed service providers). These
companies provided industry-average security, and they had access to each
customer’s software stack. Perhaps, we thought, we could provide our
detection service to these companies, piggybacking our program into those
tools. That way, we’d get to track down vulnerabilities from the inside.
We’d be in the stack.
We launched Cork in 2024. Here’s how it works. Our software agent
inspects every nook and cranny of the stack. After about thirty minutes, it
reports and pinpoints vulnerabilities, and then it recommends steps to
remediate them. Once a customer is secured proactively from the inside, the
risk plummets.
At first, we thought about selling insurance to these companies. After
all, once they’d been optimized for security, they were excellent risks. We
could offer low rates.
The downside? We would have to craft our business to the norms,
guidelines, and timetables of the highly regulated insurance industry.
We came up with another idea. Instead of insurance, we would provide
the MSPs with $500,000 warranties that they could offer to customers. It
enhanced their offer. And with our software agent probing for
vulnerabilities within each stack, the customers had peace of mind. In its
first twelve months, Cork grew from zero revenue to millions of dollars in
annual recurring revenue, which matches some of the fastest-growing cyber
security companies.
This venture, like many others, came from wondering about an
exorbitant insurance bill, which led to questioning the reigning one-size-
fits-all market in that sector. Any requirement that is applicable to everyone
must be questioned. In the end, it may not be necessary. Or it may turn out
to be way off target, like the cyber-insurance premium for Lululemon. In
either case, these crude markets exist only because no one has dug up the
data to show how inefficient or unfair they are, and how little they know
about their customers. For those ready to dig deeper, it can be rich pickings.
GUIDANCE
Most of us are so busy following policies, rules, and regulations that we barely
notice them. We naturally focus on changes, either rising dangers or
opportunities. Emergencies certainly catch our attention. But this first step of the
Algorithm is chock-full of rules and customs we take for granted. It’s important to
hunt them down.
How to do this? In this and the next chapter, the first two steps of the Algorithm,
the work involves questioning everything—from product requirements to human-
resources policies to sales methods to the flow on the factory or kitchen floor.
Everything. Only then can you spot which rules and regulations are necessary,
and which others are enshrined by tradition. As we’ve seen, that’s the first step of
the Algorithm. And the same inventory will be necessary for the next step, as we’ll
see. If you’re going to eliminate problem areas, you first have to see and
understand them.
OceanofPDF.com