S
CHAPTER TWO
STEP 2
Delete Every Possible Step in a
Process
EVERE  FINANCIAL  PRESSURE  was a constant during my early years at
Tesla. Cash was always short and the threat of bankruptcy all too real.
We desperately needed to figure out how to do more with less because
often, we were running the company with less than three months of cash on
hand. This injected a real sense of urgency into our work, but it also sparked
innovation.
The year 2015 was especially challenging. Sales were slumping. We
were struggling to get the Model X into production, and cash flow was too
weak to keep us afloat. Especially concerning was an area that in our
cutting-edge market should have been a strength. Instead, it was anemic.
It would have been easy to say, as many did, that e-commerce simply
didn’t work for an expensive purchase like an $85,000 car. Customers
needed to work out financing. There were lots of options to review. It was
easier to do this at a Tesla store.
Elon didn’t agree. Instead, he set what seemed like an outrageous goal:
to grow digital sales by a factor of twenty—and to do it ASAP.
This stretch goal was not based on deep knowledge of online shopping
trends or clear ideas on how we would achieve it. His method was to set
hugely ambitious targets so that our teams would work feverishly on the
problem, questioning all the underlying assumptions. That was the process
most likely to produce breakthrough ideas.
When I’m looking to streamline, I start by asking managers to detail
their process, step by step. First, I want to see if they know all the steps and
understand what each one accomplishes. That exercise alone can lead to
some reductions, though usually far short of the 80 percent cuts we were
aiming for at Tesla.
Then I ask them to circle each step that the customer doesn’t pay us for.
For example, we don’t get paid to recheck our accounting or carry out
performance reviews. Those are ripe for removal. The process can be
painful, and even counterproductive. Maybe 10 percent of the steps actually
need to be reinstated. But by going a bit too far, we establish where the
limit is.
To grow digital sales twentyfold, we first had to understand our target
market. For years, the assumption internally was that Tesla owners fit into
two camps: performance or environmental. Some straddled both. But was
this assumption correct? Our sales leader, Ganesh Srivats, and Michael
Rossiter, who headed analytics, set off to find out.
What they came back with was surprising—we had not two but really
five core buyer types:
1. Tech. These customers were focused on our assisted-driving
technology, Autopilot. Our software and the app were central to them.
2. Safety. Unlike the tech buyer, who was predominantly male, the
safety buyer was almost exclusively female. The fact that Tesla’s
were the safest cars in an accident mattered most to them. Autopilot
was a negative initially.
3. Performance. These buyers love feeling the g-force while in
Ludicrous Mode, racing from 0 to 60 mph in 2.5 seconds. Safety was
a much lower priority to them.
4. Environment. These customers were most focused on the carbon
savings their purchase would generate. Strangely, despite our
leadership in electric cars, we had little to nothing on that topic on the
website.
5. Status. This one surprised us. These were drivers who otherwise
might be behind the wheel of a Ferrari or Lamborghini, but they saw
Tesla as a green, cutting-edge alternative.
It was evident from the start that the e-commerce site had plenty to cut
and optimize. We saw that the information many potential customers care
about most—the models, prices, availability, and battery range—were
buried under a lot of power and acceleration numbers. The site seemed
entirely targeted at performance buyers.
Ganesh and Michael also brought back insights into the buyer journey.
Almost all the buyer types researched their purchase for thirty to sixty days
before finally pulling the trigger to purchase.
With these insights, we redesigned the site, creating tabs with details for
each of the buyer types so they could quickly and easily confirm that a
Tesla car was for them. Sales ticked up, but not nearly enough to meet
Elon’s target. Questioning our assumption of who our core customers were
was helpful, but we hadn’t stretched the limits of how that could simplify
the sales process. Not yet.
Next came the hard part. Buying one of our cars online was laborious: It
took sixty-four clicks from beginning to end. It was a long and tedious
customer journey. With each click, we could imagine potential customers
pocketing their phones or closing their laptops in frustration. Time kills
deals. This led Elon to set another stretch goal. “Let’s get it down to ten
clicks,” he said.
Removing every possible step in a process is the second mandate of the
Algorithm, and this example fits neatly. Like other cases, it extends into
several other aspects of the Algorithm. If you’re going to reduce steps (step
2), you’re no doubt going to question every requirement (step 1) and also
simplify (step 3). Such overlapping is natural, for so much of the Algorithm
is focused on squeezing time, energy, and expense from operations. The
magical aspect of this problem-solving is that it can lead to dramatic
innovation, even reinventing an entire process.
Why did it take so many clicks to buy a car? For starters, customers
faced a lot of choices. Tesla made the decision early on to be a made-to-
order producer. That’s unique. But no one had questioned in years the sheer
number of choices we were presenting to customers. There were seven
colors, varied seat covers, and different engine features to choose from. The
options seemed endless, with more than three hundred thousand potential
unique combinations.
Over coffee one day with Sterling Anderson, head of the Model X
product teams, I was lamenting the choice overload customers were
experiencing. Sterling confirmed my hunch and mentioned The Paradox of
Choice by Barry Schwartz, a book that proved mathematically how too
much choice kills the customer’s ability to make a decision. I read it
overnight. It opened my eyes to the hard work that would come next. We’d
have to convince the engineering teams to simplify the offerings from
unlimited choice to core packages. Not only would that decrease clicks and
increase conversion; it would also simplify manufacturing, the supply
chain, and distribution.
If we dumbed down the whole process, giving customers only a few
choices, it would eliminate a lot of clicks. But even to suggest it might seem
blasphemous, given the core belief that Teslas were made to order. Were we
going to revamp our entire production to reduce clicks on an e-commerce
site that accounted for a tiny fraction of our sales?
I grabbed Doug Field, head of engineering, and Greg Reicheld, head of
manufacturing. I wanted to loop them into the results of the research on our
core buyers and the cost of the choice complexity we were presenting to
them. We discussed many other smaller groupings of Tesla customers, but
all of them ultimately fit into one of two camps: practical buyers or
performance buyers.
Given that, I asked, what would happen if we reduced the options to just
two packages?
They told me it would “make us look like Honda.” That was not where
they saw the company or wanted it to be. Tesla was an exclusive brand,
even as we were expanding our lineup to reach the vast swath of middle-
income drivers.
When I asked what the impact of this simplification would be on
manufacturing, they told me they’d get the data.
A week later they reported that reducing the choices to two basic options
could transform manufacturing, simplifying it and lowering costs. It would
also create supply-chain efficiencies because we would be buying in greater
bulk from fewer suppliers.
From a manufacturing perspective, it made a lot of sense. But the
concerns about the brand were real. A good number of our customers were
paying top dollar for a car. Would they be unhappy with a much smaller
menu of choices?
It seemed to me that many luxury businesses focus on quality while
offering limited choices. For example, unlike classic American diners,
which have gigantic menus, fine restaurants often present guests with a
single sheet of paper featuring only a handful of choices. The customer
trusts that they’re all good. As long as the customer believed in our brand, it
seemed that we could also reduce our options to a single sheet.
Doug and Greg were on board and up for giving it a go. The impact on
supply chains, manufacturing complexity, and margins had the potential to
be substantial.
I took the idea to Elon, and he went for it right away. So we dove into
implementation mode. We simplified our offerings, slimming down the
manufacturing and the supply chain. These changes were more important
than the work we were doing on the e-commerce app, but the two were
related. It was the process of counting clicks that led us to reduce
complexity in our operations.
The impact of this simplification on sales was almost immediate.
Conversions soared both in the stores and online. Sales increased by more
than 20 percent. Costs decreased, albeit more slowly, and our gross margins
improved to record levels.
The huge adjustment took us more than halfway toward our e-commerce
goal. It lowered the click count from sixty-four to thirty. We’d made a lot of
progress, but we still had three times too many clicks. How to get rid of the
last twenty?
Most of the clicks had to do with financing, including loan and lease
documents that required dozens of signatures. How many of those
documents were really necessary? This takes us back to step 1 of the
Algorithm. There appeared to be a set of rules that the entire industry
followed, literally to the letter. Some of the wording had come down
through generations.
I discussed this with Elon. He had a simple insight: The essence of a
loan, boiled down to a single-paragraph agreement, is that the buyer
guarantees to pay a certain amount every month until the car is paid off. He
asked, “Why has one paragraph turned into dozens of pages and
signatures?”
The answer was legal requirements in each state. He immediately
challenged our team to research every one and to come back with a
summary of which were actually required by law and which were not.
We discovered that the supermajority of the documents were created by
bank lawyers taking every precaution to protect the bank’s interests, not by
regulators. Questioning every requirement, the first step of the Algorithm,
led us to a potential innovation that no one in the industry had even
considered: a one-click loan or lease document.
First, we had to get the banks on board. This effort was led by Bill
Donnelly, our in-house banking guru. Bill asked dozens of banks if they
could create a one-paragraph loan. They told him he was crazy. He kept
looking for a taker.
Finally, two banks agreed to consider this crazy idea: U.S. Bank and
Ally Bank. Both were known as sophisticated players in the auto-finance
market, and they were small and nimble enough to be innovative.
Working with the team at U.S. Bank, we studied all the documents that
require signatures. We found that 90 percent of the content was pro forma
verbiage. Some of the paragraphs were repetitive and apparently
unnecessary, but they remained because people judged it a risk to remove
them.
Meanwhile, we were collecting customer information that we could
share with the bank. We had a lot of data on the customers, so the bank
didn’t need to ask for it. The result was a one-click loan application.
Our head of sales operations, Zean Nielsen, took it a step further. Zean
worked with Experian to get prefilled data for each customer. That meant
all we needed was the customer’s name and driver’s license. The rest of
their information would prefill on the loan and leasing forms.
The result? With only twelve clicks, customers could buy and finance a
Tesla. Over the next ten months, sales on the site and app went up by a
factor of twenty.
This innovation transformed the face of digital sales for the automobile
industry—and the process started by simply setting a goal to reduce the
number of clicks (or steps) a customer would have to make on our website.
HURRICANE IRMA: FREEDOM TO IMPROVISE
Eliminating every possible step not only transforms manufacturing and
makes life simpler for consumers. It also adds speed, which can make all
the difference when dealing with emergencies.
That’s what we were facing in September 2017. A fearsome hurricane
named Irma was barreling through the Caribbean, pummeling Puerto Rico
and Cuba. It was the most powerful Atlantic hurricane ever recorded at the
time, and it was poised to batter Florida. The threat sparked a massive
exodus, with nearly 6.8 million Floridians leaving their homes.
The result was a massive statewide traffic jam. The northbound lanes of
every highway were packed.
We began to receive many calls from our concerned customers. Stalled
traffic was consuming their batteries. They were seeing their ranges shrink
minute by minute. Many feared that they’d end up stranded on the side of
the highway, in the path of the coming storm.
Karim Bousta, who headed up global service, was reading emails from
increasingly worried Florida customers as they inched northward. One
woman in Florida came up with an idea: She wanted to pay Tesla for access
to more battery power in her Model S.
The battery of her cut-rate Tesla, she knew, was engineered to withhold
30 percent of its capacity. If she wanted access to that power, the upgrade
would cost $4,000. She didn’t want to buy that. What she proposed was a
temporary upgrade, for maybe a week. What would that cost?
Karim’s services team saw that many of the urgent messages coming in
from Florida were from customers like her, all of them driving shorter-
range economy models. (Their 220-mile range was fine for commuting and
errands, but bad for mass exodus up a long peninsula.)
The storm had pummeled Cuba and was approaching Florida. Winds
were already whipping. Karim called together a small council: a couple of
engineers, a customer-service person, and himself. Brian Boggs, his
software lead, told him that a targeted update could work. It was technically
possible to provide additional range to drivers in evacuation zones with a
software update. But there were risks.
This is when Karim faced a choice, and it had to be made quickly.
Updating the software of thousands of cars, giving them a free and
temporary battery capacity upgrade, was a momentous step, both legally
and technically. And if the update failed, it could be disastrous, conceivably
draining the batteries or turning off the cars. The company could face
ruinous lawsuits. Karim could get fired, as well as being roasted in the
press. All sorts of bad things could happen.
But a very bad thing was about to hit the Florida coast, and Tesla
customers were desperate for range.
I worked closely with Karim at the time. Together, he and Ganesh and I
had our hands on just about every part of the company. Karim, a
Frenchman, had moved from Paris to California in 2008 and joined Tesla
seven years later, just months after I started.
Karim came to Tesla in large part because he loved the car. In the early
2010s, he was living in Palo Alto, where Tesla had its largest market
penetration. “I was seeing the first Teslas on the road,” he says. “I thought,
‘This company’s going to change the world.’ ”
He bought a Model S in 2013. Two years later, he was in Elon’s office,
interviewing for a job with us. It was to run Tesla’s global service network.
“I told Elon,” Karim recalls, “that I knew nothing about cars.”
Elon’s response: “That’s good.” He told Karim that he wanted people
who hadn’t lived within the century-old industry and been shaped by its
norms. He wanted people who thought differently.
Karim took this seriously. When he started, he pushed hard for each
person’s freedom to make decisions on their own and to take initiatives.
There were only three conditions, as he saw it:
1. Make sure you won’t hurt or kill anyone.
2. Don’t break the law.
3. Don’t do anything that might cost the company millions of dollars.
Aside from those, the mandate was to come up with ideas and execute
them. “It gives you great freedom,” he says, “and creates amazing
opportunities.”
As the hurricane approached, it was Karim facing the decision about
whether to take a huge, risky, and unapproved initiative.
It was vital to help the customers, who could be in harm’s way within
hours. That was the urgent priority. But the hurricane, he knew, also posed a
challenge to our brand. If Teslas failed to perform in dire circumstances,
consumers would take note and conclude that our battery-powered Teslas
were not cars they could count on.
In many people’s opinion, we were still selling an unreliable technology.
If an internal-combustion car, a Chevy or a Ford, ran out of gas on the slow
way north, no one would think to blame the manufacturers or the
technology. But new technologies are viewed differently, and at that early
stage of electric vehicles, a host of paralyzed Teslas on the side of Route 95
would reinforce range anxiety on the part of the public, which is the
greatest concern when buying an electric car.
There was also the PR angle: Would the press and all the Reddit
subgroups of Tesla enthusiasts feel cheated when they learned of our battery
manipulations? Some Floridians, envisaging hurricane scenarios, had spent
the money for full-range cars. Would they press for refunds once they saw
that the economy drivers got handouts?
Karim and his small team spent a few minutes weighing the risks. He
went through his three conditions:
First, was it possible that sending the software update might kill or hurt
anyone? That was within the realm of possibility. If the update flopped and
cars shut down, people could drown or get crushed by trees. But the same
thing could happen if their batteries died.
Second, would Karim and his team be breaking the law? They didn’t
know, but they figured that if they happened to break some law while trying
to help thousands in the path of a hurricane, they’d defend their case.
Third, could it cost Tesla millions of dollars? Again, perhaps. But
customers were clamoring for help. Doing nothing helped no one, and the
software update could make a difference.
“Force it,” Karim told his team. Facing the emergency, he was deleting
most of the steps of our normal process. He wasn’t slowing down to ask me
or Elon for the go-ahead. And his team wouldn’t have time to carry out
more than a few minutes of testing on the update.
The engineering team created the update within a few hours. By 10 p.m.
Pacific time, they had it ready. They updated two thousand cars in South
Florida and sent them a note, telling them that they’d have more range for a
week and wishing them well in a very difficult time.
Florida customers were thrilled when they got notifications that their
cars immediately had 75 miles more range for the next week—and for free.
The press picked up on it, and Tesla was applauded for doing the seemingly
impossible—responding to customers and changing the capabilities of
thousands of cars within hours. Karim’s bet paid off in every way. Tesla’s
stock even went up.
It’s easy to praise people who blast by the usual requirements during a
crisis and make smart and timely moves. However, not every case works
out as well as Karim’s improvised updates during Hurricane Irma. The key,
though, is to foster a culture in which people have the confidence to make
important decisions and take action—and to back these people up even
when things don’t go as planned. Occasional flubs are inevitable in a
corporate culture that embraces risk. They’re proof that people are ready
and willing to take initiative.
ZUMI: DON’T BOTHER WITH THE BILL
A few years ago, I was with my two partners at DVx, Karim Bousta and
Ganesh Srivats, at a DVx offsite meeting in Miami. After a busy day, we
convened at an excellent restaurant. We enjoyed sunset cocktails on a
rooftop terrace and then sat down to a meal. Every element of the
experience was ideal—until we asked for the check. By that point, we were
weary from a long day of work, eager to wrap up, and we found ourselves
waiting for far too long. That frustration was the only negative, but it stuck
in our memories. This was a business opportunity: to remove the only
unpleasant step in an otherwise pleasant experience.
When we come up with an idea like this at DVx, one of the three
partners takes the lead. The natural to lead our restaurant venture was
Ganesh. It was Ganesh’s work in his ten years as a top executive at
Burberry that had led Elon to hire him to run Tesla stores. He knew all
about customers.
He also knew a better model. When Ganesh was a boy in southern India,
his father belonged to a club where he could walk away after lunch without
asking for the bill. At those clubs, like others around the world, the
expenses were included in their monthly bill. “You walk out, and they know
who you are,” Ganesh says. “I thought, ‘Why can’t I get this experience
everywhere I go?’ ”
It’s no secret why the clubs can afford to let diners walk away without
paying. They know their members’ names, they have a billing relationship,
and there’s a strong element of trust that they’ll pay.
Would there be a market for a tool that would give a restaurant and its
customers a way to behave more like a dining club in Chennai? Ganesh did
some research. To no one’s surprise, it showed that customers enjoy
engaging with the restaurant staff throughout the meal. But the good times
end when it comes time to settle up the bill. First there’s the issue of getting
the server’s attention, raising hands with the little writing motion. Then
there’s the wait for the check, often with delays, and in old-fashioned
restaurants, the sluggish back-and-forth with the credit card. Even with the
more efficient payments at the table, there’s the uncomfortable moment
while choosing the tip under the server’s watchful eye. “Is this how you
want to end the experience?” Ganesh asked.
The research showed that the payment step is not only unpleasant for
customers. It also gums up the works for restaurants. The check cycle at
each table takes an average of twenty minutes in New York and London.
That’s idle capacity. The restaurant could be making money from those
tables, and instead they’re sitting there, with increasingly unhappy
customers peering anxiously for their server. Worse, to carry out the
laborious payment work, they have to hire more staff.
The extra waiting time costs a restaurant revenue in a number of ways.
Picture yourself at a restaurant with an empty wine glass. The entrée has
arrived, but it’s hard to get the waitstaff’s attention because they’re running
around with credit cards and payment machines. Freeing the servers from
that job gives them more time to dedicate to their customers’ needs and
appetites: to sell them more food and drink. “It’s like giving them another
twenty minutes,” Ganesh says.
We figured that it wouldn’t be hard to replicate a similar setup to give
the same service to everyone. The ride-sharing platforms, from Uber and
Lyft to China’s DiDi, all provide similar apps for mobility, and they
effectively eliminate the payment step. It’s one of their advantages over
traditional taxis.
A similar mobile app could handle a restaurant reservation, the ordering
(if desired), the default tip, and the credit-card or bank payment. People
could enjoy a meal and then leave, as if they owned the place.
We called our new company Zumi. “It means ‘to be taken care of’ in
Japanese,” Ganesh says. “In Hindi it means ‘joy.’ ” In the summer of 2024,
we debuted our app in a restaurant in the Notting Hill neighborhood of
London. Business promptly grew 20 percent over the previous year. The
restaurant found that payless dining gave customers a sense of being
known, and belonging. Some quickly became regulars, and they started to
treat the restaurant almost as a club.
As an entrepreneur, this step-removal thinking is a key generator of new
business ideas. It involves focusing on the nastiest moment of any job or
experience. Devising a way to get rid of that unpleasant step can lead to
startling efficiencies in an enterprise—and in some cases, a new company
altogether.
GUIDANCE
If you find it difficult to reduce the complexity of your operation to a series of
steps, try this: Imagine teaching every aspect of your operations to a highly
advanced, but entirely ignorant, robot. You have to explain every element in
excruciating detail. The thing doesn’t even know what to do with its arms and
hands without explicit instructions. Teaching it will take all day.
It’s at this point that you might start looking for shortcuts. Do we really need
this task? Isn’t this one already covered? And maybe we can combine three of
them, eliminating two. Once you’re tuned into the minutiae of operations, and
each one (in this game) is a pain, you might get a lot more creative on how to
chop out steps, gaining in step 2 of the Algorithm.
By making the effort to see your business through the eyes of the uninitiated,
you can start to ask, again and again, the most important question in the
Algorithm: Why?
Another idea: Launch a contest among your colleagues. See who can spot a
single step to be eliminated. Maybe it’s duplicative, and not needed at all. Maybe
it was created for the old status quo and simply hung on. Some steps, you’ll find,
are necessary but can be folded into other actions.
OceanofPDF.com