C
CHAPTER THREE
STEP 3
Simplify and Optimize
WHITTLING DOWN AN ENTIRE COURSE TO A SIMPLE
SENTENCE
USTOMERS  COME  TO  Tesla stores with a million questions. They ask
about the battery: the range in cold and hot weather. They wonder
about entertainment and navigation, about the safety of Autopilot, and about
the price of Ludicrous Mode. They also have plenty of questions about
financing and insurance, and about resale value.
It’s a ton of information for a store rep to learn. When I started at Tesla,
the training was extensive. New hires had a full month of it—online classes
with lots of videos to watch, quizzes to take, and pages to read. It was an
intensive course in all things Tesla—a minischool, you could say, to train
them to deal with the complexity of their jobs.
Our voluminous training packets were the result of accretion. This is all
too common in organizations large and small. As humans, we have no
problem dreaming up endless scenarios, each one brimming with potential
problems and solutions. Hundreds of them made their way into our training
regime.
This clearly ran counter to the third step of the Algorithm: simplify and
optimize. The training marathon was also unsustainable. As we experienced
exponential global growth, we had to get legions of new hires on the job in
a hurry. The monthlong onboarding was too slow. My stretch goal was to
whittle it down to two hours in order to meet our growth goals. It was our
job to figure out how.
I called a meeting. The first order of business in our meetings at Tesla
was to agree on the goal. What were we hoping to achieve? What was the
problem we needed to solve?
This may sound obvious. Try it. I’ve found that if you go around the
table and ask people what they’re hoping to accomplish in the given half
hour, you often find that they’re not all on the same page. To reach any
goal, they must be.
Next, look around the table (or the Zoom screen). Does every person
have a hand in the problem or solution? Those who are only tangentially
involved should get up and leave. They’ll likely only complicate things, and
their time is worth more elsewhere.
Our small, focused group brainstormed on the goal to reduce a month of
training to two hours. The key, I knew, was simplicity: If you can break
down a complex problem into simpler components, you can solve it.
We analyzed every aspect of the training, trying to figure out which
details entry-level staffers needed to know on day one and which details
they could pick up on the job. We considered every opportunity for
shrinkage. Could we reduce an enormous orientation PDF to a small set of
FAQs? How many of the facts could staffers look up quickly on their
phones? And how could we preserve the scrappy culture in our stores—a
culture that was focused on surprising and delighting customers? We
wanted to give them the anti–car-dealership experience: no pressure, no
haggling, no drawn-out closing process. The goal was to remove all of that
friction and surprise them with how easy it was to buy a car from Tesla.
As hard as we tried, we were nowhere close to reducing a month to two
hours. It was clear that we needed a more dramatic fix.
This led us to rethink the entire relationship between a Tesla sales
adviser and a customer. It was important, of course, to answer questions and
sell cars. It certainly helped if customer-service reps knew what they were
talking about.
Yet an interaction with a person who seems to know all the answers
would not necessarily stir up the excitement or passion we were looking for.
More than simply answering questions, we wanted our customer-service
teams to focus on delighting customers—something they were not likely to
experience at a car dealership.
This simplification process, we could see, was leading us in a new
direction. When you have stretch goals, this is common. I call it innovation
by subtraction. Instead of simply slashing the training time, our original
goal, we shifted our focus toward the customers. How can we serve them
best? And how do we want them to feel after an encounter with one of our
employees?
We established delighting customers as the goal. In the best case,
customers would not only buy the car; they’d also fall in love with the
brand and become ambassadors for it.
Working backward from that objective, we pictured a satisfied Tesla
customer driving away with a smile on her face. What made her experience
special? We figured it was most likely a human connection. A customer-
service employee listened to her, understood her needs, and provided even
better help than she was hoping for.
The key ingredient for that scenario was a certain type of employee: a
simplifier, the type of person who can solve a pressing problem by seeing
the one or two key elements that need to be addressed. These were the kind
of people we needed throughout the enterprise, from manufacturing to
customer service. We focused our hiring accordingly. The year I arrived, in
2015, we had 75,000 applications for 2,500 openings.
Our question we faced as we rethought our laborious and time-
consuming training and onboarding regime was whether we could radically
simplify. Could we bypass the educational regime altogether?
It was certainly worth a try. Simplify was the third step of the Algorithm.
In this case, we took it to the letter. We decided to replace the training
operation, along with all of its materials, with a single aspirational goal.
This could reduce thirty days of training to two minutes. It would involve
less memorization while demanding more creativity. We would be
harnessing a larger share of the employees’ brainpower, and this promised
to generate more breakthrough ideas, the essential fuel for exponential
growth.
The aspirational goal could not be numerical. Meeting numerical targets
is useful but rarely delightful. And it wouldn’t work simply to encourage
Tesla employees, in a general way, to wow their customers. They needed
sharper focus than that.
We discussed it and finally came up with a simple and compelling goal:
“Be so great that they’ll talk about you at dinner.”
This was easy to communicate and to understand. It effectively shifted
people’s perspective from simply fulfilling requirements to the much more
creative arena of problem-solving. And it focused them on human
interactions because you have to have a sense for each customer, and their
needs, to come up with service they’ll be raving about over the dinner table.
The approach also made strategic sense. The same great stories that
made their way into dinner conversations were also likely to go viral on
social media platforms. They would travel by word of mouth. This was vital
for our marketing, especially since we were low on cash and spent nothing
on advertising.
It may sound a bit extreme to eliminate the training regime. But in a
sense it returned Tesla to its start-up roots. Customer service in most start-
ups is an improvisational exercise, and everyone is involved. There’s rarely
any training or written instructions or FAQs. People listen to customers and
respond to their concerns. They ask around. They look things up. In this
way, they learn. It’s on-the-job training.
Our single sentence was simple, as the Algorithm demanded. At the
same time, it would drive urgency and accountability by linking customer
satisfaction directly to employee performance.
Most importantly, by replacing a month of training with a single
aspirational goal, we could eliminate the immense training bottleneck. New
hires could get productive faster. We could grow faster.
So we cut a series of short videos announcing our pivot to training based
on the “make them talk about you at dinner” principle.
It was only a few weeks after we unveiled our simple new mantra that I
got a note from a customer in Florida. He had called customer service with
a big problem. His Model X had broken down. His wife was about to give
birth, and he needed to take her to the hospital. The Tesla service manager,
he told us, showed up within minutes and drove them to the hospital.
Then he had the idea to drop off a loaner car for them at the hospital.
Before dropping it off, he made one more stop. He noticed when he picked
them up that their children were at the house with visiting grandparents.
Realizing that the parents might be in the hospital for a few days, he
stopped and picked up some essential groceries for them, dropped them off
at the house with some treats for the kids, and then headed to the hospital to
drop off the loaner Tesla while theirs was serviced.
The car owner reached out to Tesla and asked to speak with me. When
we got on the phone, he relayed the entire story to me and how blown away
they were with the service manager’s kindness. I too was blown away. I
wondered how in the world the service manager thought to do all of these
things for them.
I called him, told him how proud I was to be on his team, and then asked
him what inspired him to shower this family with kindness.
“You asked us to make them talk about you at dinner. So I used that as a
guide,” he answered.
“Well, they will be talking about you every year on their child’s
birthday,” I responded. “What a family story you’ve given them!”
There are times when you get a double bonus. We started with one
radical idea (to cut training down to 10 percent of the prior time it took),
and that radical idea led to another (why not get rid of training altogether?).
I’ve found that innovators have a relentless pursuit of better. Not best,
but better. They seem to constantly ask, “How can we make this better?
Why do we do this? What problem are we really trying to solve?”
That relentless pursuit of better often yields a series of smaller
improvements that, when added up, lead to a big improvement or
innovation. Every once in a while, magic happens, and the first radical idea
leads to another radical idea. That’s when transformation can happen.
REINVENTING DELIVERY
Explosive growth stresses systems. That’s axiomatic. In our case, we had a
host of legacy procedures from our time with a smaller customer base—and
they were all buckling under the pressure of growth. We previously had the
time, for example, to give each customer a white-glove experience. A
member of our team would sit down with each new Tesla owner, work
through the paperwork, and then give them guidance on their new car,
providing them the lowdown on everything from battery management to
Ludicrous Mode. Each of these sessions gobbled up an entire hour.
This time-consuming status quo was stressing out Nikki Monterroso and
her entire team. Nikki was running our largest delivery center, in Fremont at
our manufacturing plant. People from all over the Bay Area, our biggest
market, would come to the center to pick up their new cars. Other buyers
would fly in from around the world just to get a factory tour as part of their
delivery. The Fremont delivery center was a busy place. And as Tesla grew,
it became almost unmanageable. When Nikki had started at Tesla, only a
year and a half earlier, the operation sent out maybe ten cars per day. By the
time I came along, in 2015, it was up to two hundred per day. She had forty
employees by this point. They were working twelve-hour days. Getting
more growth from the current process was unsustainable.
Nikki remembers the first time I dropped in. I was new on the job and
just getting acquainted with all of the operations that were stressed by
Tesla’s growth. When I asked her how it was going, she answered: “Really
terrible.”
Then she explained how she was managing it. There were two main
problems, she said. First, the white-glove experience was no longer tenable.
The lengthy sessions simply could not scale to match the exploding
demand.
The second problem, more serious, had to do with quality. There were
issues with the cars, everything from door handles and upholstery to nicks
and scratches on the paint job. Some of these problems were recurring,
which indicated that the process was off. Nikki and her team couldn’t
deliver these cars without fixing them.
We were close to the factory, so Nikki would walk over and find the
person responsible for each problem. Then they’d figure out how to deal
with it. Working this way, she had developed a network of contacts in
manufacturing. She was running what amounted to a quality-control unit.
I asked Nikki about her background. She told me that she’d been in tech
sales in the Bay Area but that she really loved cars. In her free time, she was
a drag racer. So when she heard about jobs at Tesla, she signed up for any
job she could get, and soon found herself at the delivery center.
Nikki was a problem solver. She could see that the solution to the white-
glove challenge in delivery would involve reducing the person-to-person
interactions and delivering most of the orientation through YouTube videos.
It wasn’t as warm and friendly. But it was the only way to scale.
The quality and service issues she was dealing with were much thornier.
I agreed. But the best way to solve them was to take them on systemically.
I surprised Nikki by asking her if anyone else on her team could handle
her job. When she said yes, I gave her what amounted to a battlefield
promotion. Her assignment was to iron out bottlenecks that she’d been
dealing with, but on a global scale.
As cars came out of the factories, they were checked for quality and
underwent all sorts of testing. Then they were shipped to delivery centers,
like Nikki’s in Fremont. That’s where a huge bottleneck was growing.
Just like Nikki, the other managers of our delivery centers were spotting
details in the new Teslas that weren’t quite right. They certainly didn’t want
to deliver them to customers without fixing them. Because Nikki had been
close to the manufacturing plant, she could address the issues at their
source.
But what was a delivery manager in Dubai or Frankfurt to do? If they
found a problem, they might have to send it to a local service center. Many
of them were doing just that. These predelivery fixes added immense cost.
They resulted in delays that disappointed our customers while also
devouring scarce funds.
At the heart of the problem, Nikki recalls, was fear. These people were
delivering cars that cost top dollar—some of them more than $100,000—to
some of the most demanding customers in the world. If those people took
their new cars home and then found a scratch on the door or a handle that
didn’t look quite right, they’d feel upset. They might complain or even post
photos on social networks. These owners expected perfection.
Consequently, our distribution managers, fearing that certain details might
be amiss, made sure to have them fixed, often at great cost.
This expensive process was entirely at the discretion of the local
delivery managers. There were no established standards for what
constituted a problem and what did not. And the managers used their own
words—and not always in English—to describe the problems they found.
The result was a torrent of unstructured data. The issues weren’t reported in
columns or by codes, but in whichever words the managers chose to write.
“For a year,” Nikki says, “I was reading a lot of free text.”
It was Babel, nearly impossible to measure or to optimize. The entire
predelivery process was defined in words and judgments that could not be
compared. It was a crazy quilt of complexity.
Nikki had to fit all this into a coherent framework. And she had to
simplify. This meant creating a common vocabulary for the problems in a
new Tesla, as well as standards for what constituted a problem and what did
not.
Establishing this unified system took a full year. But the benefits were
clear. With everyone working from the same page, we now had an effective
feedback loop. We could quantify and classify problems and identify their
source.
When I had first met Nikki, she was operating a solitary feedback loop,
shuttling between the delivery center and the factory. Now she and her team
had created a tool that enabled us to pinpoint problems, count them, and
trace them to manufacturing processes. With that feedback, we could
address them effectively.
At the same time, our painstaking processes to prep the new cars also
needed a simplicity revamp. Initially, we prepped each car before delivery,
cleaning it thoroughly and correcting any minor factory defects. This took
six hours per vehicle, making scale impossible. To solve this, we stepped
back and asked our teams how we could eliminate steps. Our stretch goal
was to reduce the delivery process from six hours to fifteen minutes per car.
When optimizing a process, it’s essential to work with subject-matter
experts, people who know each step intimately. Some of them, it’s true, are
wedded to the inefficient status quo. But others are passionate about fixing
it.
As Nikki and her team were studying the delivery process, she would
get hundreds of emails every week from people in the field. One of them, a
detailer from Boston, was named Cameron Wetherbee. “He would email me
every other day with quality concerns,” she says. “He wanted to be part of
the solution.”
She brought him aboard her team at the factory, along with other
subject-matter experts. Together, they analyzed the delivery process, minute
by minute. One of the most time-consuming tasks had to do with smoothing
over and retouching scratches. Almost all of them occurred, they found,
while shipping the car from the factory.
They came up with what looked like a car rain jacket. Made of soft,
recyclable material, it covered the car completely. But it also had a
removable windshield and side window panels so that a driver could see
when loading and unloading a car. For less than $15 per car, Nikki’s team
had eliminated 99 percent of our paint-scratch issues, which were costing
more than $100 per car and eating up precious time.
The team didn’t stop there. They tackled another expensive bottleneck:
delivering cars by truck to hundreds of locations. It was inefficient and
expensive. So they simplified, shifting to regional hubs, most of them on
train lines. Instead of custom shipping, we could now ship most of the cars
en masse by train. That decreased shipping costs dramatically.
Within the delivery hub, Nikki and the teams broke the process into
sections and set a sequence for them: First pitch was vacuuming, second
pitch was washing, third was buffing, then glass, and then final wipe down.
By dividing the work into manageable chunks, they streamlined
operations and minimized bottlenecks. Staffing was adjusted according to
cycle time. They found, for example, that good buffing took more time. So
they adjusted both the workflow and staffing for it.
The new approach allowed us to dramatically improve efficiency and
prepare a car for delivery in just four minutes, versus five to six hours
previously. It had the benefit of increasing operational capacity by more
than a factor of four while also reducing strain on the team.
This simplified model was so successful, it was adopted globally.
Simplification is a sneaky enabler. When teams do the work to simplify,
they free up resources and speed up the velocity of cash in a business. The
faster that cash flows through an operation at a profit, the less capital the
business needs to thrive and grow.
For example, if company A takes fifteen days to produce a car from
scratch but company B takes five days, the balance sheet impact is
enormous. All things being equal, company B needs a third of the working
capital of company A.
This is why process cycle time matters. You can’t get cycle time without
optimizing a process, and you can’t optimize a process without simplifying
it. It’s that simple.
ALINEA: THREE-STAR SIMPLICITY
I’d long heard about Alinea, the Michelin three-star restaurant in Chicago. It
was a blend of fine dining and performance. The chef, Grant Achatz, had
made it big at Napa’s legendary French Laundry, one of the finest
restaurants in the world, and was now a rock star in the industry. So when
my son graduated from college, my wife and I celebrated with him and his
girlfriend (now wife!) at this special restaurant in the Lincoln Park
neighborhood.
I had heard that the experience came with lots of surprises. And sure
enough, upon entering we were escorted to a large community table, where
we were seated with a bunch of strangers. That was unexpected. I’d made a
reservation for a table for four and was a bit confused by the community-
table seating. Before I could ask, they brought us a smoky cocktail of some
sort. We were just finishing that when the friendly servers tapped the four of
us on the shoulder and led us into the kitchen.
“You’re going to learn how to make root beer floating balloons,” they
told us. We found ourselves standing in front of a large, iron, hand-cranked
machine that looked like it had come from Willy Wonka’s chocolate factory.
And just as promised, it was spewing out balloons made of root beer. Balls
of sugar floating in the air were otherworldly. Getting to pop one of them
and tasting a root-beer mist made us feel like little kids. This restaurant was
clearly different. Little did we know how different.
They led us out of the kitchen and back to the room we’d come from,
the one with the community table. But this time, the walls in the room had
moved, and we were in our own space, at a table for four. I thought about
all of the customers that evening being guided with great precision along
different routes, all of the courses synchronized with their stops. Alinea was
managing immense complexity.
A dish came out. A smoking volcano. It looked like a kid’s science
project. Buried underneath the fire and stones was a small steak and
potatoes. As we ate, a pillow underneath our plates released a vague scent
of campfire.
Each of the eight courses was increasingly fun, wild, and incredibly
delicious.
I was looking at this experience through the lens of the Algorithm. As
each dish on the tasting menu arrived, all of them on custom-designed
plates, it was clear that Grant Achatz conformed to step 1. He questioned
basic assumptions, both about how restaurants should be run and how
people enjoy food. In almost all restaurants, it’s only about the food. At
Alinea, it was about the food for sure, but it was just as much about the
experience and about creating pure joy.
Later, I had the chance to tour the kitchen. That’s where I encountered a
megadose of step 3: simplify and optimize. The kitchen was immaculate, as
I expected. But what struck me was the organization. Achatz, who had
learned the business while working in his parents’ diner, showed me the
flow. Dishes moved quickly from one station to the next. At each stop,
every tool and appliance was positioned to minimize movements, whether it
was to ladle a thimbleful of gravy onto a croquette or drop a bouquet of
edible flowers on a salad. The sous-chefs barely needed to turn their heads,
much less twist their bodies. Even the workings of their arms and hands
were optimized.
Economy of movement at a top-class restaurant is vital because the time
constraints are severe. At Alinea, the three-step process of preparing the
dish, adding sauce, and arranging it on a plate should be complete within
seconds, Achatz told me.
I asked the chef how they mapped out the process through the kitchen
with such precision. He told me that they went through their work,
monitoring their movements, before finalizing the layout. Only when they’d
determined the optimum spacing did they bolt the equipment to the floor.
Although Alinea’s operations, from the kitchen to the rotation of the
customers, are endlessly complicated, the underlying process hinges on
simplicity. In fact, the more complex an industrial process, whether in an
auto plant or a world-class restaurant, the greater the need for simplicity.
Each operation must be shorn of all extraneous movement and variety. This
is so that each step can be repeated quickly and flawlessly.
Once you have that simplicity, you can add speed and reduce cycle time.
This is step 4 of the Algorithm, which we’ll look at more closely in the next
chapter. Reducing cycle time is crucial in a business like Alinea. It increases
throughput and revenue while lowering the production costs for each unit.
That translates into cash flow.
From a customer’s perspective, this relentless optimization is effectively
hidden. We felt utterly relaxed at our dinner, savoring the dishes and
enjoying each flourish of the Alinea performance. But we and the other
customers were riding—most of us unwittingly—on a hyperefficient
assembly line. It got us in the door and led us along our journey, step by
step, dish by dish, on a rigid timetable, but felt flawless. We didn’t feel
hurried, but I’ll bet we left precisely on their schedule.
GUIDANCE
By now, you no doubt grasp the first principle, that simplifying is better. But how
do you simplify? And when you do, how do you optimize?
Let’s break those down. There are some hacks and tools for simplification.
First, to simplify a process, you need to know the current process cold. To do that,
map it.
I like to map a process with sticky notes. Each step in the process gets one,
and if you do it right (and don’t miss even a minor detail), you’ll easily fill a wall.
Now circle the steps the customer pays you for. In the purchase of a car, they
pay you for the car, but not for the paperwork, the registration, or the receipts. In
other words, that stuff is for you (or for the government), not for them.
Challenge yourself to eliminate all of the steps the customer doesn’t pay you
for. If you can’t eliminate them, make them disappear, and run them behind the
scenes. To eliminate steps, you’ll need to go to the source.
In Nikki’s case, that meant going to the factory to get them to stop producing
errors. But it also meant Nikki’s team extensively thought through flaws that came
up in shipping the car and discovered how the team could handle them more
effectively. In the end, the simplification removed the car errors altogether and
made them disappear for the customer.
The goal of the simplification step is to get rid of almost all of the steps in the
current process.
Once you’ve done that, you can optimize. Nikki’s team took a process from
hours to minutes. They practiced and practiced so the process was fast and
repeatable. That is core to optimization.
You see that both simplification and optimization are not reliant on earth-
shattering ideas. Instead, they are reliant on breaking down a process to what the
customer pays you for and relentlessly taking out the rest of the steps. This is
hard, grinding work. But it produces breakthroughs in the kitchen and in the retail
environment. I’ve yet to find an environment where this essential element of
innovation doesn’t work.
In the next chapter, you’ll learn an additional hack: Speeding up cycle time can
show you where to optimize.
OceanofPDF.com