S
CHAPTER FOUR
STEP 4
Accelerate Cycle Time
OME  ENTERPRISES  SEE  efficiency and speed as the key to cutting costs.
They can produce the same amount with less work. In some
workplaces, a speedy process means that losses turn to profits or that
employees can get home in time for dinner. Nothing wrong with that.
But for companies looking for exponential growth, the magic of speed is
that it accelerates cycle time, and faster cycle times mean higher throughput
with the same fixed resources. Going fast is a simple hack for growth.
Speeding up a process also exposes quality and process issues. Addressing
them often enables an organization to move even faster.
Accelerating cycle time is the fourth step of the Algorithm. I look at the
first three steps as enablers. By questioning requirements, eliminating steps,
and simplifying, an enterprise puts the pieces into place. Only when the
quality is excellent and the process is optimized is it time to hit the
accelerator and achieve faster cycle time. That’s when revenue and growth
take flight.
I was exposed to the concept of cycle time early in my career. It was in a
factory environment. In car repair, the cycle time clock starts when you
drop off the keys. It ends when you get back the keys to your car. At
Amazon, the clock begins when you place your order and ends when it is
delivered. It’s a simple notion, but a hard thing to optimize. But if you
succeed, cycle time becomes a powerful competitive advantage.
This came to roost for me in a very simple but inconvenient way. Early
in our marriage, a neighbor accidentally backed into my wife’s car. Her
back door and quarter panel were smashed.
I took her car to a local body shop. The owner gave me an estimate and
said the car would be done by the end of the week. I called on Friday to
pick it up. No luck. The owner said that the wrong parts showed up. I’d
have to wait a week.
I called the following Thursday. No dice. The technician had gotten busy
on other repairs and hadn’t gotten to our car. Call back next Friday.
This continued for two more weeks—the delivery date slipping from
Friday to Friday. A total cycle time of more than four weeks to repair her
car.
Curious about this industry, I did some research on what the cycle time
was, using a proxy: average insurance rental-car days. It turned out the
average insurance repair rental was eighteen days. So our situation wasn’t
all that unusual.
When I got the final bill, I dug into it and was shocked at what I saw.
Total repair hours billed? Eight. Yes, eight hours.
Our car sat in the shop for more than four weeks, yet it had been touched
for only eight hours. My research into the industry showed that average
labor markups were 50 percent, so that meant the car might have actually
been touched for no more than five to six hours. Over a full month.
This reveals a hack I’ve learned. When looking at cycle time, look also
at “touch time”—the amount of time the product or service is actually being
worked on.
The difference between cycle time and touch time represents your
opportunity to improve.
I couldn’t let go of how terrible the experience was, so I kept digging to
learn more. Further questions revealed that auto-body repair was a $30
billion industry in the United States. But it had managed to sidestep the lean
manufacturing revolution that had spread from Japan to the rest of the
world in the last decades of the twentieth century. Its organization, by
contrast, dated back to cottage industries, to blacksmiths and woodworkers.
It was ripe for disruption. I believed we could reduce cycle time from
eighteen days to four hours. If we managed that, we could accomplish
same-day collision repair. It would upend the industry and immensely
improve customer experience.
Nine months later, I launched a company from our kitchen table to
revolutionize collision repair. That company has grown to hundreds of
locations and has taken cycle times down from eighteen days to eighteen
hours (it turns out that ordering and receiving parts takes about twelve
hours). But that is a huge disruption. And all of it from optimizing one
metric: cycle time.
CYCLE TIME AT TESLA
At Tesla, we knew we had to play catch-up in cycle time. Toyota, the leader
in lean manufacturing, had been relentlessly refining its manufacturing and
logistics for a half century or so. Toyota can turn aluminum dust into a
Camry or Prius in five days and then sell it more quickly than most. It took
Tesla almost three times as long. For each car produced, we were waiting
much longer to get paid and turn our investment into cash. That’s a massive
difference—potentially the difference between a highly successful auto
manufacturer and another who isn’t long for this world. To compete in
global markets, we had to get to Toyota levels, at the very least.
One of the biggest problems (and, thus, opportunities) was connecting
what was selling to the supply chain and factory teams. This is called sales
and operational planning (S&OP). When Tesla had been selling to niche
markets, from Silicon Valley to New York City, the numbers were relatively
small. Manufacturing and sales could trade Excel spreadsheets with
production on one side, shipment predictions on the other. This was done
every Monday afternoon at 5 p.m. in a meeting at the Fremont factory. It
was so essential to the financial performance of the company that it was run
by the head of manufacturing, the CFO, and the president (me).
I remember discussing this with Neal Suidan. He’d come to the
company on the data side, after running analytics for Hillary Clinton’s
presidential campaign in 2016. He had thrived in the chaos of a political
race and also experienced the bitter sting of failure. This prepared him well
for Tesla.
Neal understood, perhaps better than anyone, the glaring shortcomings
of our S&OP. His initial job was to forecast deliveries—which cars went
where, and when. To make his calculations, he had to prospect for
information upstream, from one silo to the next. This took him all the way
through manufacturing and into the far reaches of the global supply chain.
When production had been small, this approach was still feasible. But as we
grew, the complexity jumped exponentially. We were offering thousands of
different vehicle configurations, and they were going to scores of countries,
many of them with different standards and requirements. Matching
production with sales was turning into a circus, though not a fun one. We’d
have the people from different operations in the same room, all of them
with their own numbers and priorities, and they’d often start yelling at one
another.
“It was a mountain of work to get it right,” Neal recalls. And it didn’t
always work. There were always new constraints popping up. How many of
a certain seat could the manufacturer produce in a week? Would that be
enough for the full shipment of cars to Los Angeles? If not, the only option
was to scrounge and improvise. “In the end,” Neal says, “you just send
cars.” Way too often, the wrong cars went to the wrong place.
The information chaos led to terribly inefficient factory scheduling. We
lacked visibility from end to end. We largely guessed about availability of
parts and factory capacity, about shipping times and customer orders for
one model or another. We were flying blind.
Consequently, we couldn’t plan with enough precision to manufacture
cars in large batches. We were producing ones or twos and not getting the
benefit of scale. Then we’d have to take valuable time to change over the
factory for another model. Similarly, we would send small numbers of parts
through the supply chain. This slowed us up and cost money. There had to
be a better way.
It was a bit of a paradox. We ran arguably the world’s most sophisticated
digital network for auto customers. Their Teslas were information
appliances that sent and received software updates and timely information,
whether about charging availability, motor efficiency, or air quality. Yet the
company that produced these networked wonders was still running crucial
operations on technology that many of us would recognize from high
school.
We knew, of course, that we had to simplify, both radically and quickly,
if we were going to improve our cycle time. We had to get various teams on
the same page.
We put Neal on the job, along with two talented colleagues, Jeff
Goodrich and Swati Padmanabhan. Their mission was to bring all of the
disparate information together. Their software was to give everyone real-
time visibility on every process and every constraint. It would extend from
the supply chain and manufacturing all the way to the ever-shifting
forecasts for demand in hundreds of local markets.
This was in 2018, right at the time that much of the senior leadership of
the company, including me, was leaving. From the perspective of Neal, Jeff,
and Swati, they were practically running the place. In a sense, they were.
The vacuum in top leadership posts opened opportunities. Neal found
himself running the entire S&OP, which was previously run by the
president, the CFO, and the head of manufacturing. What he and his team
most badly needed was precisely what they were building. It would not only
save the company. It was to become its nerve center.
They designed the so-called Vehicle Plan so that everyone would see all
of the up-to-the-minute information. People would have access to it whether
they worked in supply chain, production, logistics, finance, or customer-
delivery forecasts. Everyone would work from the same updates and
numbers.
Even before they finished the plan, they fed much of the data onto a
laptop. It was a lot for a single machine, and it frequently crashed. But it
became a lifeline for us. After the introduction of Model 3, in 2017, it
enabled us to scale production by a factor of twenty-five—from twenty
thousand units per quarter to a half million. Such scale and complexity
would have crushed the old way of doing things, with its spreadsheets and
screaming matches. There were now some ten thousand parts going into
these machines, and they were coming from seventy-two countries. Without
our central system, we never could have begun to multiply production at
this scale.
We were now able to share vital data such as manufacturing schedules:
Everyone knew, minute by minute, every important detail about inventory,
supply chain, and orders. This helped streamline production and cut cycle
time. Car-production cycle time fell from fourteen days to less than six.
Not only did cycle times improve, but because we had weekly visibility
into our performance versus plan, we also had the ability to respond to
shortfalls and make up for them with new plans. For the first time, Tesla
was making its quarterly projections to Wall Street, and the stock
responded.
But the digital platform wasn’t the whole story. Neal combined this with
the existing weekly session of the leaders of sales, manufacturing, supply
chain, and delivery. With up-to-date information, we were more agile. We
could coordinate quickly, turning potential crises into blips.
This helped turn chaos into organized execution. Benefiting from this
increased visibility, we could move from reactive to proactive. Where
supply-chain disruptions used to rattle us, we now spotted them early and
had time to respond. Sometimes it was supply shock: a strike in France or a
shipment of semiconductors still in Taiwan. It could be a demand shock,
like an unforeseen tariff in one market or another. Or it could be an
unexpected event, like an especially provocative tweet from Elon about a
new vehicle feature.
The laptop application was a resounding proof of concept. After I left,
Neal put together a much more robust and expansive Vehicle Plan,
launching it in Shanghai in 2019. It made sense to start in China, where
there was a new factory without the complications and constraints of our
Fremont plant. Also, the Shanghai plant was producing only one type of car,
the Model 3. That reduced complexity.
The software debuted just weeks before a deadly new virus emerged in
the city of Wuhan. The timing of the debut could not have been better. The
COVID-19 crisis jumbled absolutely everything—the supply chains, the
shipping routes, the customer behavior. These madly fluctuating variables
would have been impossible to manage in the days when we were flying
blind on spreadsheets.
Within months, the Vehicle Plan spread through the organization. It
adapted to each changing variable. If a shipment of batteries was delayed
for fourteen hours, it would calculate the impact throughout the entire
process. The information oscillated, like a market.
GM’S ELECTRIC HUMMER
Most of the stories in this book involve young companies, whether Tesla in
the 2010s or start-ups launched since then. These companies don’t have
age-old customs or routines. This no doubt makes it easier for them to
follow the steps of the Algorithm, whether questioning requirements or
simplifying and optimizing operations.
It doesn’t mean, however, that older, more established companies cannot
adapt to the Algorithm or that it isn’t vitally relevant to them. To survive in
the twenty-first century, older companies need growth and efficiency just as
much as anyone. The steps of the Algorithm can lead to dramatic
improvement in speed and quality, even in the most venerable enterprises.
Consider General Motors. The century-old behemoth has a reputation,
gained over the decades, for running a rigid hierarchy and resisting change.
In the 1980s the entrepreneur Ross Perot bought a piece of the company,
joined the board, and vowed to modernize it. He later lamented that
modernizing GM was “like teaching an elephant to tap dance.”
In 2022 I joined the board of GM. But years before I arrived, CEO Mary
Barra was already teaching that elephant to dance. She was simplifying,
questioning requirements, and setting stretch goals. In style, the contrast
between Mary and Elon could hardly be starker. Yet in many ways, their
approaches are similar.
Her crash project to build an electric truck is a shining example. The
genesis was in March of 2018. That was when Mary and her team gathered
to launch a new EV. The company had been producing an economy EV, the
Chevy Volt, soon to be discontinued. But in 2018, they wanted a new
vehicle that would change both the narrative and expectations surrounding
the auto giant.
They decided to electrify the vehicle most widely associated with gas-
guzzling: the Hummer. This wasn’t a move to appeal to the traditional
“green” market—the people who drove hybrids, composted their
vegetables, and installed solar panels. No, this would target customers who
focused on power and performance, people who in 2018 did not likely
consider themselves in the market for an EV. But maybe they would, Mary
thought, once they felt the neck-snapping acceleration of an electric
Hummer.
The concept was bold. And the execution would resemble Tesla’s in
many ways. The parallels to the Algorithm are hard to miss.
It started off with a bold vision and a crazy-fast target. By the auto
industry’s traditional rhythm, it takes four years to design, develop, and
produce a brand-new model. The electric Hummer, she said, was to be in
production in half that time.
She picked a young, brash and talented engineer, Josh Tavel, to lead the
project. He had full autonomy to pick his own team. They’d develop their
own process, free from the established rules and procedures within the
company. “We can’t sit back and watch cool stuff be done,” he said. “We’ve
gotta be the ones making everybody else uncomfortable.”
Tavel started small, with just a handful of colleagues. They were
virtually free of GM’s hierarchy and had streamlined approvals. Still, as
they began work, they confronted a slew of traditions and best practices.
Some of those best practices, Tavel later said, “needed to be there, because
that’s how we make safe vehicles. But you also have to break those norms,
and stop doing things the same way. Just asking the question ‘why?’ is a big
deal.”
They raced along, reducing steps. The key for both speed and quality
was to simplify. Like the chef Grant Achatz at Alinea, Tavel and his team
understood that only with a pared-down process at its core could they stay
on schedule while also adding a slew of new features.
Working through the pandemic, the small team was free to innovate,
with minimal institutional pushback. They fixed cameras on the truck’s
underbelly to give drivers a close look at the terrain. They added a power-
sharing feature that enabled Hummer drivers to deliver charges to other
EVs. Their Extract Mode let drivers raise the truck an additional six inches
for rocky terrain. And “CrabWalk” enabled drivers to steer by moving both
front and rear tires so that the truck could escape sticky situations by
moving diagonally.
The first Hummer EV rolled off the line on December 3, 2020, barely
nineteen months after the launch of the project. It was important, of course,
to get the massive vehicle on the market. But even more vital were the
takeaways for GM. Josh Tavel’s team had pioneered a new and much faster
mode of vehicle development. It wasn’t called the Algorithm, of course. But
it might as well have been.
Why? Because Josh started by questioning every requirement. He
questioned the requirements of the vehicle itself. Then he broadened the
questions to the requirements of supply chain, of manufacturing, and of
marketing.
From there, he and the team deleted unnecessary steps. With that
simplified process, they optimized and sped up cycle time to deliver a
groundbreaking vehicle in record time.
A key part of the success in doing this in established companies is how
Mary set up the team. There was one decision-maker, Josh. And he reported
directly to the president of GM, Mark Reuss. Mark continuously cleared
blockers for Josh and the Hummer team, enabling their ability to break from
tradition and norms.
I have not seen a successful initiative to innovate at speed without a
small team reporting to a top executive who will clear roadblocks. Mary’s
organizational architecture, combined with an Algorithm-like approach, was
key to success. And it can be replicated in your organization, too.
The Hummer EV was what is known in the industry as a “halo car.”
When a car company is plunging into a new era, it creates a car that has all
the bells and whistles, and produces it in relatively small numbers. Its
purpose is to signal what’s ahead, both to industry watchers and car buyers.
For decades, Chevrolet’s halo car has been the Corvette, which showcases
innovations like dual-clutch transmission and magnetic selective-ride
control, a feature that reads the road and adjusts shock absorbers. The
Hummer EV boasted huge battery range and all sorts of exotic features,
such as CrabWalk.
But more important than its halo to the outside world, the importance of
the Hummer EV is the manufacturing transformation that it unlocked within
GM. It was a dramatic injection of speed, specifically speed of product
development. Before the Hummer EV, new models took two to four years to
design and introduce to production. Since its debut, the norm is now twelve
to fourteen months.
This has enabled GM to introduce more new models than its
competitors, rapidly refreshing its product lineup across the board. A car
company’s ability to quickly introduce new models gives it a competitive
advantage. GM gets to market faster, gains one to two years of additional
cash flow from those models, and gains market share at the same time. It’s a
flywheel of speed, one that is urgent in the hypercompetitive global auto
market.
LULULEMON: FAST TRACK FOR THE OLYMPICS
At Lululemon, where I sit on the board, every item of clothing, from
VersaTwill shorts to stretchy jogging pants, emerges from an exacting
design and production process. Traditionally, it’s taken eighteen months
from the concept to the finished garment. This is a long time, but consumers
are paying for quality at Lululemon stores. And production-cycle time
doesn’t make much difference to them.
Consider the matter of color. The Canadian outfitter has a very specific
shade of dark red, and getting it just right can be a lengthy process.
Normally, white fabric is sent for dyeing to Asia, where it goes through
numerous runs. Some come out a bit darker, bordering on maroon, whereas
others blend more brown into the red, tilting more toward garnet. Samples
are sent back to the designer, who selects the ideal shade. The chosen fabric
is then shipped to the factory. Meanwhile, a member of the supply-chain
team travels to Asia to oversee the dyeing and ensure color consistency.
This process was not engineered for tight deadlines. But that would
change. In late 2021 the company won a contract to outfit the Canadian
team for the following year’s Winter Olympics and Paralympics in Beijing.
It was a dream opportunity. The company would have the opportunity to
produce a wide range of outfits for figure skaters, bobsledders, skiers, and
curlers. It would be a chance not just to support the national teams but also
to exhibit fabulous design before a global audience. The only catch:
Athletes had to be wearing the outfits within four months.
Lululemon had to accelerate cycle time—the fourth step of the
Algorithm—in a very big way. This was a jolt. It wasn’t like Tesla, where a
foundation of our culture was to optimize and speed up production. At
Lululemon, it would require a dramatic shift.
After all, the slower status quo seemed to be working fine. The company
produced quality goods and enjoyed a growing market share. The
company’s deliberate and fastidious processes seemed to be a winning
formula. But for the Olympic contract, every step in the process had to be
questioned—and then clipped, optimized, folded into others. The Olympic
team at Lululemon had to reinvent the very way they made things.
The initial step at Lululemon was to suspend virtually all rules and
approvals. Managers could use their own judgment. That sped things up.
But the biggest acceleration would come from remaking the process
itself. Traditionally, Lululemon’s operations moved like a relay race. First
came design, and then the baton would move to various stages of logistics
and manufacturing. It was largely a linear process. To reduce cycle time by
more than a factor of four, it was clear that as many of those steps as
possible would have to run concurrently.
In that sense, Lululemon would operate more like the kitchen at Alinea.
There, one sous-chef might be grilling octopus while another prepares the
Korean barbecue sauce and a third carves an intricate carrot design to adorn
it. All of this must go on simultaneously (or patrons would wait forever and
the food would go cold).
To coordinate, the Lululemon Olympic team brought together managers
from every step in the process and sat them in the same room. This was a
first. These people had long operated in their own domains, with little input
into what others were doing. But if they were going to merge processes,
they had to cross boundaries themselves. Having them all in touch with one
another, and at the same meetings, made for lightning-fast decisions.
This was crucial, for they were dealing with immense complexity. Even
on the accelerated schedule, designers had athletes come into their labs. The
designers body scanned them to see where they lost and retained heat. They
even worked with production teams to test materials in a simulation of
Beijing’s environment.
The designs were for customizable modular outfits, which added more
challenges to the production—not for a mass market. For the opening
ceremony, for example, the bright red parka called for straps inside so that
if the weather was warm, the parka could be worn as a backpack.
Removable sleeves could turn it into a vest. And a removable bottom
section could be refashioned as a scarf or even a travel pillow.
Following the lean manufacturing playbook, the Lululemon team
focused on bottlenecks—and came up with ways to fix them. One of the
thorniest they faced involved the intricacies of the fabrics. This was
challenging: Many of them were to feature prints and patterns drawn from
microscopic images of Canada’s emblematic maple leaf. The colors,
following the metamorphosis of the leaf through the seasons, were to range
from the autumnal red of the maple leaf to snowy white.
Normally, this range of fabrics and colors would have called for multiple
crossings of the Pacific. Instead, the designer and supply-chain leader
traveled together to oversee the dyeing process at the source factory. The
back-and-forths, which used to take weeks and even months, were handled
in minutes.
As a result of these changes, Lululemon not only met the deadline; its
outfits also won rave reviews, including from The New York Times, which
called it “a win for a brand that had never made an Olympic kit before as
well as for the team that will wear it.”
After the unveiling of the Olympic outfits, video of the designs went
viral on TikTok, and the collection sold out within hours. Like GM’s
Hummer EV, Lululemon’s Olympic garb was a halo project and a smashing
success. International awareness of the brand shot up.
The fast turnaround led Lululemon to hunt for other cycle-time
improvements. One area of focus was to speed up delivery to customers.
The company had a network of distribution centers and could usually
deliver shipments within two days. The challenge was to speed it up by a
factor of twenty-four, to two hours. This was urgent because e-commerce
giants were establishing a new same-day norm.
The solution was to get closer to customers by using stores as
distribution centers. They then made a deal to engage Uber drivers for
delivery. This created a premium service, one that members could get for
free. The upshot: Speeding up cycle time fortified customer retention.
The long-term benefit of radical cycle-time improvement is showing the
organization that it can go faster. And that revisiting a process and
constantly looking for improvements in cycle time will yield a potent
competitive advantage.
GUIDANCE
Accelerating cycle time can quickly break a process. And this can be helpful to
show the weaknesses of a current process. But remember, this book is all about
imagining a new process. And that needs to be done first. No need to waste time
speeding up the old process.
Instead, design, simplify, optimize, and begin to work your new process. Then
speed it up. Aim for 50 percent increases in speed each week. The barriers to
achieving that kind of stretch goal will show you what needs to be optimized. In
other words, accelerating cycle time will show you where to work.
For the Lululemon managers, that meant the dyeing process. And they broke
the speed barrier by going to the factory to sit side by side for the dye and
approval process.
Each of these examples of cycle-time improvement shows how improvements
can increase the speed of cash through a business. Whether radical or
incremental, the changes are often decisive. The competitor in a market with the
highest rate of speed of cash through its business typically wins. The cash flow, of
course, is wonderful. But the improved operations also result in higher quality.
As a leader, you can take any process, speed it up, and then watch where it
breaks. This will show you where to focus. A process can go only as quickly as its
slowest step. Working on that faulty step speeds up the entire process. Often,
you’ll need to innovate like crazy to speed up that step.
The best operational leaders that I know look at systems as a whole. They
measure the cycle time from end to end. Rather than working randomly, they work
systematically. And one of the powerful tools in their arsenal is speed in the form
of cycle time. It can be yours, too.
OceanofPDF.com