M
CHAPTER FIVE
STEP 5
Automate Last
HAND-MANUFACTURING IN A TENT
OST  OF  THE  Tesla stories I’m telling start out with us facing dire
circumstances. That’s partly a reflection of the time. Elon’s relentless
push for growth during 2014–2019 had us teetering financially as we
stretched to the max every dollar we had on hand. The way we both saw it,
the company had to grow, and grow fast, to survive. It was big bet after big
bet.
It’s in this type of charged circumstances that a lot of creativity happens.
In survival mode, we’ll consider just about any option. Problem-solving,
driven by desperation, is common to any type of company that’s pushing
the bounds.
That was the method to the madness of stretching capital. We could have
raised enough to make the company comfortable. But as entrepreneurs, both
of us had seen the entropy that’s created by having a big safety net of cash
on the balance sheet. Energy dissipates. Companies get fatter and slower.
We opted instead for the resource constraint common in early start-ups.
In those companies, small teams with limited resources often accomplish
great things—while fending off existential challenges. That became our
norm.
The existential challenge we faced in 2017 was in the Bay Area’s
Fremont plant. We had cash to last us ninety days. But death was much
closer than that. Our norm was to wait a maximum of seventy-two days
before paying suppliers. We owed a lot. And assuming that we would pay
on time, we had only eighteen days of cash (ninety days less seventy-two
days). We were in deep trouble. The press was on it. Short sellers were
trashing the stock on Twitter and cable TV.
Things were not going to plan. Our strategy hinged on mass-producing a
new affordable sedan. The Tesla Model 3 promised to lead us into the vast
middle market, where we’d compete with the likes of Toyota Camrys and
Volvos. This was our big bet for transformative growth. Tesla would
advance as both a major mainstream car company and the global leader in
EVs.
However, the Model 3, the linchpin of the strategy, was lost in
Production Hell. We were failing at our primary job, manufacturing
automobiles. The gleaming new robots in our largely automated production
line were failing us. Production at the Fremont plant was nil. Every day,
default inched closer.
The genesis of this critical problem came from Elon, and he’s the first to
admit it. Years earlier, he saw the growing challenge from China. At least a
dozen fully financed low-cost manufacturers were primed to push into the
global EV marketplace. To compete, he believed, we had to drive our costs
down by at least half.
For this he masterminded an automated assembly line. It would be
ultraefficient, spitting out cars by the thousand. It was the answer, he
thought, to global competitors. We’d build a cutting-edge automated
system. He called it the Alien Dreadnought—the “Machine That Produces
the Machine.”
A little more than a century earlier, Henry Ford had revolutionized
manufacturing with his Model T assembly lines. Perhaps the Alien
Dreadnought would be the twenty-first century’s equivalent, precision
machines collaborating with each other and producing cars.
There was only one problem: It wasn’t working. The robots crashed into
each other. Model 3s fell off their trays. There were jam-ups, delays, quality
issues. It was a disaster.
At a time when we were desperate to produce fast and cut costs, we
were paying overtime for an army of expensive repair specialists. And they
still couldn’t coax the machines to work together and effectively produce
cars. Even those that emerged from the assembly line were unfit to sell.
Early on, we held out hope that it was just a learning-curve issue. Once
the robotic elements of Alien Dreadnought were in tune, the system would
make good on its promise. It didn’t happen.
To make matters worse, the supply chain was shipping parts to the
factory in anticipation of thousands of vehicles produced each week. Those
parts were piling up outside of the factory, and the obligations to pay for
them added to our woes. The clock kept ticking louder and louder. It felt
relentless.
Synchronization is one of the biggest challenges in automated assembly
lines. Getting machines to work in concert requires coordination. It’s been
an issue since the dawn of the Industrial Age. In Charlie Chaplin’s famous
movie Modern Times (1936), Charlie can’t keep up with the speed of the
assembly line and makes a comic mess of it. The eternal challenge is to
create systems in which each station receives its component material just
when it needs it, and passes it on precisely when the next station is
expecting it.
Endowing a complex system with this kind of harmony requires intimate
knowledge of how the whole thing moves. How often does a welding robot
need another door? What is the optimum delivery schedule for each robot in
the line? Is each one capable of carrying out the work at that speed? If some
robot down the line is slower, will the others slow down? Or will inventory
pile up relentlessly at each chokepoint?
If you picture human beings carrying out assembly-line work, like in the
kitchen at Alinea, the key is communication. Each person is in tune with the
other teammates. They learn the patterns, knowing when each one needs a
component—whether a sculpted carrot or a fine sliver of foie gras. If there’s
a hiccup on the chain, they talk and iron it out. That’s a feedback loop, a
crucial element for a system to learn and adjust. Humans are experts at
making such adjustments.
Our robots lacked this coordination. Each one was capable of
performing its job. That was its knowledge base. The robots applied their
welds or hitched on doors, or one of hundreds of other tasks, and moved
onto the next.
However, they had minimal awareness regarding the rest of the Alien
Dreadnought. The whole thing was like a team of superstar wannabes who
can’t play well together.
The faltering automatic machinery badly needed human intervention.
We sent in an army of expensive technicians and engineers, hoping they
could coax the machines into making cars. To no avail.
At an emergency senior-management team meeting, we didn’t have to
go around the table to define the problem we were facing. We had to start
making cars.
Jerome Guillen, our head of automotive product, came up with what
sounded like a wild idea. He said that if we could build a long tent on our
grounds, he would set up an entire assembly—one to be operated entirely
by human beings.
On one level, his idea was sound. Our machines couldn’t build the cars
we so badly needed to sell. Humans, by contrast, were fully capable of it. In
fact, for much of the first century of the automotive age, it was human
autoworkers who handled the job. Facing this emergency, we had little
choice but to dump Elon’s twenty-first-century vision, at least for a while,
and supplant it with a dose of twentieth-century Fordism.
By building the cars by hand, Jerome argued, we would learn the steps
and intervals in the construction process. Only after we’d learned the ins
and outs of the manufacturing system would we know enough to begin to
optimize the process. Once we optimized, we could reincorporate machines,
one by one.
Jerome had a precedent for this idea. In 2010, when he was new at the
company, Tesla created an “alpha workshop” inside the factory and hand-
assembled a small batch of Model S cars. With knowledge gained from this
experience, the company deployed the machinery more intelligently.
Elon had opted to bypass this educational step for the Alien
Dreadnought, and we face-planted on it. The focus now, however, wasn’t to
question what we got wrong but to figure out how to start making cars. We
were like the anxious passenger stuck in a gridlocked New York cab. At
some point, you jump out and take off running.
Within days, Jerome and his team had erected a long prefab building, a
so-called sprung tent, on the grounds of the Fremont facility. The cars
would make their way down the line, step by step. Workers would bring in
parts as needed right off the truck trailers they arrived on, through the
sidewall of the tent. “Concierge service,” we called it.
The first cars came off the line slowly. There was a lot to learn. But
Jerome and his team gathered data, including lots of firsthand observations,
and they optimized. They saw that they could save time by delivering
different parts to different stations, along different routes and timetables.
There were always bottlenecks to address.
With each adjustment, the system grew more efficient. Jerome and his
assembly team in the tent eventually removed 50 percent of the steps in the
production of the car.
Our goal was to produce 1,500 Model 3s per week. In our first week of
manual assembly, we made 75. Within six weeks, the system was ten times
more efficient, and it produced 750. Our financial position, while still
shaky, grew less dire.
The near-death experience with the Alien Dreadnought reinforced what
we knew but occasionally forgot: Don’t automate until you know exactly
what you’re doing—every motion, every turn, the pathway of every
component. With this knowledge, you optimize, shortening the routes that
components have to travel, slicing seconds off jobs. Only when this
flowchart is shorn to the simplest and most efficient form can we begin to
think about inviting in a robot or two.
This was important enough for Elon to place it as step 5 of the
Algorithm: Automate last.
Smart entrepreneurs have known this for a long time. When
Amazon.com was in its infancy as an online bookseller, the operation ran
entirely on human labor. As orders came in for books, one of the Amazon
team members would run to a bookstore and buy them. Then they would
package and mail the books, figuring out the most efficient way to carry out
this job. What they learned eventually informed the automation that
Amazon is now known for.
DoorDash had a similar start. Rather than building an ordering system
for multiple restaurants, it went manual instead. The three founders scanned
menus from local restaurants within three miles of their dorm. They put
those menus up on a website with a Google Voice phone number to order.
As calls came in, they would fulfill orders by hand to learn the restaurant
ordering and delivery process. Only after studying it and optimizing it did
they begin to automate.
In our case, hand-manufacturing in the tent not only saved the company;
it also led to global growth. Once we had a reliable system at our
manufacturing core, we could really speed it up, in Fremont and elsewhere.
The pared-down process that Jerome and his team created served as the
foundation for mega-factories in Tesla’s future, from Shanghai to Austin,
Texas. And the idea of delivering parts directly from the truck trailer
through the sidewall of the factory became the new model of modern
automotive factory and supply-chain design.
MAKING SENSE OF A CHAOTIC LOT
Most of us have experienced that sinking feeling, often bordering on
despair, when searching for a single car in an endless parking lot. Whether
it’s at Mall of the Americas or Disney World, the cars seem to go on
forever, row after row. Many of them look alike. Sure, the sections and rows
are numbered and lettered, some even tagged with colors or fruits. But
when you’re pulling kids out of car seats and answering questions and
rechecking tickets and water bottles, it’s all too easy to forget to make a
note, by photo or text, that you’re parked in Pineapple C–12. Hours later,
trekking through Parking Lot Hell, you can find yourself envying the driver
of the green Day-Glo minibus. At least it’s visible.
In 2015 we were grappling with our own version of Parking Lot Hell.
Thousands of Model Xs emerging from our Fremont facility stretched
across vast acres of parking lot. These cars were in the stage called End of
Line, Work in Progress (EOL-WIP). Many needed different quality tests.
Some needed an adjustment or a fix, perhaps different carpeting or a
headlight to satisfy a European standard. Others were ready to go—but not
all to the same destination. Some would be heading south, others east. A
ship in the Oakland harbor might be waiting to take a load of them across
the Pacific.
What was the status of each car in the lot, and where was it headed? The
new cars had to go through a series of tests—water, voltage, noise,
vibration, among others. Some were further along than others, but the
information wasn’t visible. We were desperate to turn this inventory into
revenue.
A big part of the problem was that we had rushed into production of the
Model X because we didn’t have the luxury of taking several months, or
even a year, to test and fine-tune our manufacturing line. That was the
industry standard. But we largely skipped this step for two reasons. First,
we needed to sell cars in a hurry. Second, we trusted that we were a
different breed of car company, one that could learn on the fly.
What we learned were very painful lessons. We had serious quality
issues. And those cars, with one problem or another to fix, were piling up
by the hundreds, and eventually the thousands, in the vast parking lots
outside the Fremont plant.
We had people going through the lot, row by row, laboriously tagging
for each status and destination. This was slow and cumbersome, and it cost
money. As ships and trains waited for their cargo, we were picking out the
cars one by one.
We desperately needed organization. That much we knew. The
immediate issue was much simpler: We lacked visibility. The cars all looked
alike. We tried at first to address the issue with technology, from RFID
chips to handheld computers. It didn’t help us see the problem. And there
were all kinds of frustrations. The space was so immense that WiFi signals
petered out.
I assigned the job to Nikki Monterroso, who had previously optimized
our pre-shipping and delivery process. She proposed creating a simple and
colorful scheme for our thousands of cars. Only when we could see the
various groupings, by model, specs, and destination, could we start to
organize them. “It’s got to be as simple as Fisher-Price,” she said, referring
to colorful educational toys.
For an entire week, her team went up and down the rows of cars,
classifying and marking them. They used paint pens on windshields and call
signs to indicate where each car was heading and what it needed. They
provided more detailed information on a sheet, which was placed on each
car’s dashboard.
Once this preliminary work was done, we were able to take aerial drone
photos of the lot and scope out the size of each grouping. In a sense, they
were like tribes. Each one needed its own territory, or staging ground. Some
required much more space than others.
Nikki and her team began to divide the lot into different parcels for each
category and subcategory. The groups, they saw, were always in flux. The
group missing the water test might be half as big in February as it was in
March, and twice as big in April. So the team used markers they could
move, like road cones. “As the inventory shifted,” Nikki recalls, “our
process could adapt.”
There was nothing high-tech about it. Logistics officers from World War
II would recognize many of the elements. The advantages of this low-tech
approach, much like the manual assembly of Model 3 (which would come a
couple of years later), were flexibility and learning. Nikki and her team
came across every variable in their system. They could experiment and
adjust. Over two years, they optimized a system that they knew intimately.
EOL-WIP was no longer a problem.
However, with the massive growth in volume following the launch of
Model 3, in 2017, we needed a digital upgrade. Creating software to
manage EOL-WIP would have been a fiasco at the beginning of the
process. But after two years, Nikki says, “We knew exactly what we needed
to track, where we needed to track it, and all the important data points.”
Automation, whether robots or software, is the final step of the
Algorithm. And by 2017, our EOL-WIP system was ready for it.
This is where Paul Fulwyler enters the story. Paul grew up on a cotton
farm in California’s Central Valley. At the age of eighteen, he moved to Los
Angeles and started his career with big hotels. With a focus on customer
service, he learned to adjust to the quirks and moods of movie stars and
regular folks alike. On his walk to work in the early 2010s, he would pass a
Tesla store. He saw that their service departments had a role for
“concierge.”
“I figured, why not?” he says.
He got a job. And he immediately saw how backward and random the
service operation was: “They had no processes. People were booking
appointments in Outlook. I said, ‘I can’t live this way!’ ”
Paul has many of the same skills as GM’s Josh Tavel. They both think
through processes, figuring out the timing of each step and precisely what
information each person needs at that juncture. It’s a crucial blend of
process and communication. It’s the way Paul thinks.
He quickly developed procedures in the Santa Monica shop. Then he
worked to bring all of the Los Angeles shops onto the same network, all of
them with access to the same information, from time slots to available parts.
In Los Angeles he developed an incentive system of points, with
employees garnering more points when they handled big jobs. There was a
scorecard, and people could see how they stacked up. “We competed with
each other,” he says. “It had a draft effect.” One employee, when he learned
about the competition, quadrupled his work from one week to the next. The
prizes: $100 to the monthly winner, along with a weekend driving one of
the Tesla loaner cars.
Even later, as Paul climbed into senior engineering roles, overseeing big
projects, he held onto the title of “concierge.” He was always solving
somebody’s problem.
In our case, it was to turn our Fisher-Price solution into software. Paul
developed it. He didn’t release it for a while because he wanted it to be
perfect. People at Tesla began to wonder if the software even existed. They
began to call it the Unicorn Report.
When it came out, the Unicorn dramatically sped up our end-of-line
operations. With the online dashboard, we had real-time visibility. The cars
were equipped with sensors, and Paul’s system provided up-to-the-minute
data on how many cars were waiting at each station—thirty-two at the
water test, eighteen in paint repair, and so on. It quickly spread to Tesla
operations around the world. It worked beautifully—in large part because
Nikki, Paul, and their team had first optimized everything by hand.
CURBEE: TURNING A TESLA INNOVATION INTO A
START-UP
The mobile service we developed at Tesla was a big hit with our customers.
With our house calls, they could get their car serviced without even
changing out of their pajamas. It also cut costs for Tesla, taking heat off of
building additional service centers. In many cases, it was simply a more
efficient way to service cars. It was a winning idea.
So naturally, when Karim Bousta and I launched the start-up incubator
DVx in 2020, we decided to replicate the mobile service we’d developed at
Tesla. The idea was to develop software enabling the eighteen thousand
non-Tesla dealers in the country to offer this new service. The system would
have to manage the routes, the fleets of repair vehicles, the scheduling, the
billing, and the follow-up.
We knew from the start that the work would not be a simple cut-and-
paste job. Tesla was different. Unlike other automakers, Tesla owned the
customer relationship. The cars were on a digital network. Tesla could
inspect its far-flung fleet remotely and send software updates. The mobile
service, as it developed, was an extension of the customer relationships we
already had.
Traditional dealers—whether Ford, GM, Toyota, or a host of others—
operated on an entirely different business model. They’d paid millions of
dollars for their store location, and their principal business was selling cars.
Most of them had little idea where their customers went after they drove off
the lot.
Our goal was to create a mobile-repair operating system for traditional
auto dealers. We would license to them. It would be a subscription software
business. But to understand how to build this OS, we had to know what
they needed and what they didn’t. We needed to understand every aspect of
their business. And for that we would have to create one from the ground
up. Only by building it would we learn the business.
A couple of dealers in northern California let members of our team camp
out in their repair shops for a couple of weeks. It wasn’t highly optimized,
but they had routines that worked. Many of them were detailed in sticky
notes on the walls.
Studying their processes helped us understand the way they ran their
shops—the pressures they faced, the resources they needed, the blend of the
repairs that came in, and the percentage of them that could be handled with
house calls.
Still, we faced lots of unknowns. We didn’t know what a dealer’s
potential market was because many of their one-time customers got their
cars fixed elsewhere. The economics were also unclear. No one knew how
much customers would pay for home service or how the dealers might
adjust their business to this model. How much would they have to invest?
Could they charge more than local mechanics for the added convenience?
Would they need to expand or rejigger their workforce?
There was a lot to learn. We decided to set up our own mobile-repair
business that would function as our laboratory. In July of 2020, still amid
the COVID-19 pandemic, we opened up a new mobile car-servicing
company. We opened up our shop in Sunnyvale, in the heart of Silicon
Valley. We would dispatch mobile-repair specialists in well-equipped vans.
They would handle the 90 percent of repairs that don’t require lifting the car
into the air.
The potential for the market was huge. And we knew from our Tesla
experience that the model worked. Customers loved it. But Tesla was
different in crucial ways. It was wired into Tesla’s digital ecosystem from
day one. In that sense, Tesla operated in much the same way as Apple. It
hosted customers in a relatively closed garden.
Our challenge was to create a service that would thrive in a much more
random marketplace. The vast majority of dealers had more tenuous
relations with the customers. They’d see them while the car was on
warranty and then say goodbye until the next car—if the customer didn’t try
another brand. Aside from dealers, the auto-repair market was (and is) led
by a few national chains. But there are also loads of local auto-repair shops
that do a brisk business.
That was the marketplace we were heading into with our Silicon Valley
mobile-repair start-up. Our partner Karim Bousta led this project from the
start. His goal was to develop hands-on industry know-how and later
encode it into software. This would work for all the dealerships in the
country, regardless of brand or affiliation, enabling them to forge deeper
and richer relations with customers and also to establish a new business:
mobile repairs.
Paul Fulwyler and Nikki Monterroso, who began working with me at
DVx after Tesla, joined Karim early on. They both had lots of experience
building systems to manage workflow.
It was clear from the start that as far as technology went, our team was
operating on virgin ground. There was no software package for running a
mobile car-repair business—nothing like the powerhouses in other domains,
from Turbotax to Adobe’s Photoshop. Many repair shops still managed their
business by scribbling on ledgers and wall calendars.
One way to approach this challenge would be to build a software
program to detail the resources, the jobs, and the routes. However, we
committed nothing to software because, as step 5 of the Algorithm makes
clear, we had to learn, simplify, and optimize the system first. Automation,
whether robots or software, had to come last.
So we typed job bookings into Excel. We used Google Forms for
technicians to report and annotate each job, and Google Maps for routes and
schedules. We would take that manual data and format it into a PDF for the
customer. In short, we ran the information side of our business like cash-
poor entrepreneurs.
As we learned the flow of the work, we tacked papers to the wall. When
we found ways to improve the process, we shifted the papers around,
removing steps we didn’t need and combining others. The goal was to get
as many customers as possible on each trip. This manual stage took about
seven months.
By that point, our team had learned a lot. Soon they began the first steps
toward creating a software program. They started with Zapier, a simple and
flexible program that ties together different web applications. This added
efficiency, and the program began taking shape. But it wasn’t yet time to
create a finished product.
It was only after two years of development that we’d learned enough to
make the automation pivot—from a small repair company in Sunnyvale to a
software-as-a-service start-up with global ambitions. Taking all of the
learnings, from fleet management to billing, we created comprehensive
management software for dealers to launch their own mobile-repair
businesses. Our subscription service is called Curbee. It’s currently in five
hundred dealerships, hopefully with thousands more to come.
GUIDANCE
The principle of automate last is counterintuitive. Smart people want to go fast to
solutions, and fast often means coding software in parallel with building the
architecture of the solution.
I like to think of this like building a house. The architect is designing, but the
contractor is hungry to build. So the contractor builds walls and foundations as
soon as the architect draws them. But later, seeing the entire house and how it
flows, the homeowner wants changes. However, the foundations are already
poured, and the walls are built. Changes usually aren’t possible, and if they are,
they are very expensive. All because the contractor built before the entire design
was done.
A business process is almost identical to this. If software is built before the
entire system is simplified and optimized, then code is very difficult to change. In
reality, there’s great human resistance to this, especially among the automaters
(they hate to see their code wasted).
This is avoidable. Hold the coders off until the end, until you’ve designed a
new, simplified process, optimized it, and know exactly what you want. The coding
will go much faster if you have the discipline to wait.
OceanofPDF.com