E
CHAPTER SIX
Radical Rethinking
THE FIVE STEPS OF THE ALGORITHM, COMBINED
ARLY  IN  MY  time at Tesla, sales were booming. It was 2015, and the
Model S was the top-selling electric car in the world. The larger
Model X, an SUV with falcon-wing doors, started rolling off the line.
Nevertheless, the company had invested heavily to build up production and
was still strapped for cash. And even though we were eager for greater
revenue, the growing number of Tesla customers strained our system in
dangerous ways.
The immediate problem was service. Our network of service centers was
built to handle a smaller market, and backlogs were growing at an alarming
pace. Our US customers were waiting up to thirty days for simple repairs.
Delays were even longer in China and Scandinavia. Our mission was to
delight the customer, but our service snafus were making them miserable.
The issue was popping up on internet forums, damaging our brand and
discouraging new buyers.
My operations team did the numbers. We were way behind. To handle
our growing customer base we needed another hundred service centers, and
fast. The good news was that we’d learned how to make them more
efficiently, reducing the cost of each one from $5 million to $3 million. It
was with that mixed message that I went to Elon.
He was sitting in the middle of the conference room in Palo Alto. He
listened as I explained the problem and detailed the solution. The price tag
would be $300 million.
He shook his head. “Jon,” he said, “we just don’t have the money. You’ll
have to find another way.”
It was a tough challenge, but I knew he was right. It was very similar to
a challenge I’d faced in my early start-up, Sterling Collision Repair.
Eliminating complexity there led to dramatic gains in speed, fueling growth
and expansion.
We could have improved our service performance by focusing on
bottlenecks. But the situation in the maxed-out centers was dire. The
challenge required us not just to speed up the flow but to transform the
entire process as well. We had to come up with a new way to do a whole lot
more with a whole lot less.
This meant radically rethinking how we were doing business and
coming up with a better idea. The right idea would be worth $300 million.
I’d like to say that I solved the problem. But the smartest thing I could
do was assign it to someone with a hand in the business. So I drove to the
Tesla service center in Palo Alto and talked to the manager there, Chris
Sullivan. Chris’s father had worked for me at Sterling, and I’d known Chris
since he was a boy. He understood lean manufacturing techniques. He’d
read The Goal and followed the Algorithm.
I gave him a challenge. Over the next thirty days, I asked him to tell me
what percentage of our customers’ cars we could fix in twenty minutes—in
other words, before they finished the cup of coffee we gave them.
A month later, Chris called and said he had something to show me. I
drove over and saw that he and his team had reinvented the entire process
of servicing cars. Instead of a customer-service employee out in the parking
lot greeting the customers, he had a senior technician out at the curb.
Chris’s idea was to put knowledge at the very front of the process. In the
majority of cases, the technician could interview the customer and
understand within seconds what the problem was and the fix it required.
This was the beginning of a triage operation.
The lot was divided into four lanes: small, medium, large, and extra
large. The technician would send the quick fixes, such as broken windshield
wipers or faulty seat recliners, to the smaller lanes. Those problems could
be fixed in twenty minutes or less. About 80 percent of the cars passed this
cup-of-coffee test, Chris told me.
Cars with bigger issues were sent inside and lifted. But thanks to the
triage, customers didn’t have to wait nearly as long.
Chris had come up with a smart solution to the service crush. He
eliminated the bottlenecks by reinventing the entire process. If cars didn’t
need to go into a building, we didn’t need buildings. And if we didn’t need
buildings, we could do a majority of the repairs with a mobile approach. I
gave him a hug. “You just saved us $300 million,” I said.
That approach transformed our auto-repair process. Tesla’s customers
were wowed. The experience was fast and, as auto repairs went, painless.
And competitors had no idea how we were doing it. The fact was, we had
no choice. Our service centers were overwhelmed, and we couldn’t answer
the challenge with money. That forced us to follow the Algorithm to a
breakthrough.
The interesting thing about radical solutions is that they tend to open the
door to more creative thinking that leads to further breakthroughs. I
remember looking at the service-center triage operation. Standing to one
side were the customers sipping their coffees or teas. These were busy
people. To get there, they’d have taken the time to drive through Palo Alto
traffic, with all the maddening red lights on El Camino Real. We’d already
shortened their visits. Could we eliminate them altogether?
We decided to launch a home service, making house calls with
customers the same way doctors did with patients a century ago. We didn’t
have the funds to build and equip a new fleet of Tesla service vehicles, but
we had a few returned cars—so-called lemons. We outfitted them with tools
and software, converting them into an improvised fleet. When customers
called with problems, we were often able to send a team member to fix
them that same day.
It was a great success. We turned a festering problem into a solution that
delighted customers. It greatly reduced the load at our service centers, and
we didn’t have to worry, at least for a while, about needing more of them.
One additional benefit of this innovation was that it promoted
interactions between Tesla team members and customers. The encounters
tended to be friendly because customers generally appreciated getting their
cars fixed without even having to leave their homes. Karim Bousta, the
global leader of service, came up with the idea of making the interactions
even more positive by installing espresso machines in the service fleet. That
way, the mechanics not only fixed the cars but also surprised customers
with a delicious cappuccino or latte.
This story encapsulates many aspects of the Algorithm. I call it an end-
to-end example. First, the hunt for a faster and more affordable service
solution led us to question every requirement, step 1 of the Algorithm. Did
customers have to schedule repairs? What if we could do them on the spot?
Was it even necessary for them to bring their cars to the service center? In
many cases, the answer was no.
The solution also eliminated steps in the production process, step 2 of
the Algorithm. In the backlogged legacy operation, a customer-service
person or app took each customer’s details and acted as a liaison to the
mechanic. That step was eliminated. In the new process, the most senior
mechanic dealt directly with the customer. Reducing steps and pushing for
ever-greater simplicity led not just to incremental improvements but also to
reinvention.
One of the cultural ingredients of the Algorithm, also reflected in this
example, is to broaden the product or service to include the customer
experience. In the case of Tesla, this wasn’t the least bit difficult. It was
easy to understand how a fabulous experience driving an electric car down
the Pacific Coast Highway or speeding on a German autobahn would be
ruined if the battery ran low with no charging stations nearby. Charging was
part of the customer experience, as was financing and every app on the
screen. So was service.
Processing 80 percent of the cars within twenty minutes saved our
customers time, as well as a return trip. And for many, the house calls
removed the need for any trip at all. Eliminating steps enhanced the
customer experience and paid off royally in customer satisfaction.
DIGGING INTO THE FINE PRINT
In his book Thinking, Fast and Slow, the psychologist Daniel Kahneman
analyzes the mental shortcuts we take in every aspect of our lives. To free
up our minds for the cognitive work we deem important, we accept
countless rules of thumb, or heuristics.
Some of these heuristics were true at one point but are sorely out-of-
date. Others were false from the get-go. By digging into everything we take
for granted—rules, customs, accepted truths—we can unearth great
opportunities.
This happened to me not long ago. It started with a discussion on
CNBC’s Squawk Box. I was on a panel discussing investing in so-called
supercycles. These are the transformative technologies that come around
every century or so, jolting our lives and economies. Steam power, the
internal-combustion engine, and the internet were three such technologies.
Now, you could argue, the supercycles are speeding up. We’re facing a slew
of them, from AI and robotics to biotech and the electrification of
everything.
The question for me was how to invest in the current roster of
supercycles. I replied that I assumed there were plenty of exchange-traded
funds (ETFs) offering portfolios of investments in these technologies.
In a sense, I’d answered with a heuristic. I didn’t know about specific
ETFs but assumed that I understood enough to answer the question
intelligently. After all, reputable firms market ETFs, and smart people
assemble them. Was there any reason to think that they wouldn’t capture the
potential of these supercycles?