A
CHAPTER SEVEN
Expand the Definition of Your Product
to the Customer’s Entire Experience
QUICK  NOTE : You now have knowledge of the Algorithm. But there are
three keys to actually making the approach of the Algorithm take hold
in an organization. I refer to these as the “secret sauce” that you’d only
recognize from being on the inside.
This next section of the book will unpack three key ingredients to
putting the Algorithm into practice. First, you’ve got to help your
organization take the blinders off and look at the product and problem they
are solving with the customers’ definition—not the organization’s
definition. Next, the most senior leadership has to inject urgency in the form
of personal involvement weekly (yes, weekly). You would not know it from
the outside of an organization like Tesla, but I believe this is the single most
important driver of the innovation you see at Tesla, SpaceX, and other
Musk companies. Lastly, we’ll cover the ultimate humility pill—using your
product daily just as the customer would. You won’t be able to live with the
issues you’ll uncover. And that will drive rapid change.
PLUNGING INTO INSURANCE
If you focus on what’s unpleasant in a process, you’ll likely come face-to-
face with an opportunity. It can be any bottleneck or pain point, any step
that people wish they could skip. For me, pain is an indispensable idea
generator. It was the starting point, as I’ve mentioned, for the Zumi service,
which allows restaurant patrons to skip the payment process. Similarly,
Tesla’s mobile repairs saved customers a time-consuming trip to the service
center.
At Tesla, hunting for our customers’ pain points was an ongoing
exercise. Our search stretched far beyond the car itself and encompassed the
entire customer experience. Ideally, every step of the way should be
effortless or, in the best case, delightful. In our expanded view, the user
experience extended far beyond the machines we sold. It started with
shopping for a car, then buying and financing it, charging and servicing it,
and eventually selling or trading it in. If we analyzed each step of that
trajectory, we would no doubt find pain, or at least unpleasantness. Each
instance of it represented an opportunity. Making that pain go away would
enhance the customer experience while also lifting the brand.
This idea of extending the view of the customer far beyond the physical
machine was key to Tesla’s culture. Although it isn’t part of the Algorithm,
whose five steps zero in on optimizing operations, it was central to the
company’s success. We could make the greatest cars in the world, for
example, but if customers struggled with the Bluetooth connections or
found themselves at the end of a huge line at a charging station in South
Dakota, they’d associate the brand with frustration.
This expanded view of the customer holds true across industries. A
company might have wonderful products, but if their website sends users in
circles, or if assembly instructions or FAQs are in a tiny font, the experience
suffers, and the brand takes a beating.
Like many businesses—but very few car companies—Tesla had a
marketing budget of $0. Our strategy hinged heavily on word of mouth,
from the neighborhood and the office to social networks. The goal was to
organically acquire tens of millions of customers and retain them for life. If
they loved the entire Tesla experience, they would not only stick with the
brand; they’d also become ambassadors for it.
Equally important, the wider focus could lead to discovery: new
business opportunities and rich streams of revenue.
This was on my mind early during my time at Tesla. We were desperate
for cash flow, which fluctuated wildly. Revenue in the car business is
episodic. A customer who spent $80,000 for a car might not pay us another
dollar for five years, or perhaps ever. What’s more, our auto sales were
vulnerable to economic cycles. Although a recession might only dent our
established competitors, our position was more precarious than most. If
cash flow dipped, we could die.
What we needed, I believed, were streams of recurring revenue that
flowed in month by month, like a subscription service. One promising
opportunity was in auto insurance. It clearly fell within the customer’s
experience—and not a particularly pleasant part of it. Before customers
could take off in their shiny new car, they had to shop for the right
insurance policy, provide a bunch of data, and often pay more money than
they expected. Many car buyers no doubt had a nagging concern that their
premiums were higher than they should be. This is common because many
people tend to believe—correctly or not—that they’re responsible drivers
and that their insurance premiums underwrite hot-rodders, late-night
partiers, and other irresponsible motorists. Buying insurance was the
opposite of delightful—and that spelled opportunity.
From Tesla’s perspective, insurance had the potential to deliver almost
as much revenue every year (around $1,500) as the profit we made on
selling the car once ($1,500–$2,000). Achieving a high attachment rate of
insurance to the sale of the car would provide annual recurring revenue.
That would change the economics of the industry.
It wasn’t normal for an auto company in the United States to plunge into
the insurance market. But expanding the customer view, by definition,
carries companies away from their core market. It was hardly the first time
for us. With our growing network of chargers, we were already an electric
utility of sorts. With insurance, I figured, we’d branch into finance.
I had experience with the industry. Before coming to Tesla, as I
described in Chapter 2, I saw firsthand how valuable driver data was to
insurers. My start-up, TrueMotion, used the sensors in smartphones to
monitor driving behavior. The original goal was safety—specifically to
discourage cell-phone distractions while driving. But behavioral data from
the phones also proved valuable for calculating risk. For many decades,
insurance companies had based their judgments on loose correlations, such
as the person’s zip code or age. With behavioral data, they could go straight
to the source, gathering streams of data on how each driver, minute by
minute, was operating the vehicle. A core business for Cambridge
Telematics, which bought TrueMotion in 2019, would be selling data to
insurance companies.
If the TrueMotion app delivered a valuable trickle of customer data,
each Tesla produced a gusher. The cars were networked information devices
on wheels, each one bristling with dozens of sensors. They recorded every
fast turn, every slam on the brakes. With our data, it was easy to spot
aggressive drivers, tailgaters, and speeders. In a sense, we tracked behavior
in the physical world much the way that internet companies follow our
clicks online.
With this vast trove of driver data, we would be in a better position than
traditional insurers to assess risk. We didn’t make guesses based on
demographics; we followed individuals. Consequently, we could lift the
safest drivers out of the crudely defined insurance pools they shared with
tailgaters and speeders, and offer them much lower premiums.
Looking at it from the customer’s view, it would be enticing. Did they
want to hunt for separate insurance or just check this box and buy it with
the car? We could start them off at fetchingly low rates and promise that
their payments would be even lower if they drove responsibly.
I was convinced this idea was a winner. When I proposed it to Elon, in
his conference room at the Fremont plant, he gave it the immediate go-
ahead.
Diving into a new, heavily regulated industry, however, takes time. In
the United States, each state has its own regulations and licensing. What’s
more, we needed insurance companies as partners. They had the
underwriting know-how. We would function more like brokers, bringing
them a slew of new customers, each one with a data-determined risk profile.
We thought our deal was a no-brainer for them. It turned out to be a
harder sell than expected. In the view of insurers, a young company
proposing a new way to calculate risk was, itself, a risk. Our idea also
raised questions about privacy. It wasn’t a sure thing.
We plowed ahead, hiring a small team of data scientists schooled in the
insurance industry. They studied a host of risk factors and developed
metrics for them. They calculated how many times per 1,000 miles each
driver set off the forward-collision warning, and how many minutes each
one drove late at night. They counted aggressive turns, the time spent
driving faster than 85 miles per hour, even the percentage of each trip spent
with the seatbelt unbuckled. They studied how much each driver used
Autopilot. It enhanced safety when it was used correctly, with the driver’s
hands on the wheel. Another metric, much simpler, was how much each car
traveled per month. Each additional mile added risk.
Our data scientists had their ideas, as most of us do, about what
constituted unsafe driving. However, it took time to study the feedback
loops and calculate how much each behavior correlated to risk. Through
this process, they created the template for a safety score.
The Tesla safety score functioned very much like credit scores, whether
FICO or Experian. The credit-score agencies establish the risk variables—
from late bill payments to high credit-card balances. They then share these
metrics with customers. Some customers then take steps to raise their score
and lower the cost of borrowing.
Similarly, the Tesla drivers would be able to improve their safety score
—and lower their monthly premium—by paying attention to the variables
the Tesla team was measuring—speeding, tailgating, jackrabbit starts.
It was in those years, the 2010s, that new markets were growing around
data. With Fitbits and Apple Watches, millions were starting to monitor
their workouts, their diet, their sleep. They could graph everything. The
selling point was not just to provide the information but also to give
consumers the knowledge they needed to optimize one aspect or another of
their lives.
Tesla insurance could work in a similar fashion—optimizing driving for
safety. To be sure, not everyone enjoys this data-driven corner of the digital
economy, but we felt that many of our drivers would fit the bill. A good
number of them were coming to electric cars in part because they wanted
fabulous fuel economy. Some had learned long ago to enhance their fuel
mileage by avoiding sudden starts and coasting to red lights. Such people,
we imagined, would enthusiastically jump into our new data app.
Eventually they’d be bragging to friends about their sterling safety scores
and low insurance premiums.
While we grappled with the complexities of the US market, we quickly
found insurance partners in Asia. We launched the service first in the spring
of 2017 in China, Japan, and South Korea, offering appetizingly low rates.
It was the simplest of processes. Customers didn’t need to fill out long
forms. Their data were preloaded. They simply had to understand the
concept—that their safety numbers, and premiums, would rise or fall as
they drove. The new business took off with a zoom.
The great thing about data-driven insurance is that the clientele, to a
large degree, self-selects. People who pride themselves on careful driving
are likely to sign up. Those aching to put the Tesla in Ludicrous Mode and
feel neck-snapping speed are more likely to opt for an insurance policy that
doesn’t scrutinize their movements too closely. As a result, we had large
and growing pools of low-risk drivers. We could offer them ever-lower rates
and still make money.
It was a winning combination. By expanding our market to insurance,
we removed an irksome stage from the car-buying process, and we also
saved our customers money. At the same time, this provided a steady and
growing stream of new cash.
Building on our experience in Asia, we lined up two insurers in the US
for launch, Progressive and Liberty Mutual. By the following year, the
pieces were in place to launch Tesla insurance in twelve states, including
California and Texas. The business took off. In an earnings call the year
after the launch, Elon said that insurance accounted for one-third of Tesla’s
cash flow.
Like many of the other case studies, this one features various steps of
the Algorithm. We started by questioning an age-old requirement—the
separation of car sales and insurance. That led us to eliminate a particularly
unpleasant step, and we did this by simplifying and optimizing the
insurance service. In this case the optimization extended beyond the
insurance service to the customer’s driving itself. The whole idea for this
came from the principle of this chapter: Look at your product from your
customer’s shoes. They can’t drive off the lot without insurance. Insurance
is cumbersome. We could solve that problem for the customer and
fundamentally change the economics of our business.
We didn’t stop there. Infotainment also provided potential as a
subscription. Our status quo was to offer three years of streaming with each
new car and simply add those costs to the vehicle price. It was a one-time
shot of nonrecurring income. By changing it to a subscription, we created a
new stream of revenue. We did the same with autonomous driving. Perhaps
our most creative move was taking Karim Bousta’s core idea and giving
customers the ability to gain more range by unlocking battery capacity with
a monthly subscription. Tesla was the first car company to do all this at
scale. But all of these changes started with features that the customers
loved, that were well-executed, and that customers were willing to pay for.
Extending the focus to the entire customer journey not only improves
the experience for customers. It also leads to innovation and can generate
entirely new businesses. Following the foray into insurance, Tesla’s gross
margin and cash generation exceeded those of its peers. Consequently, its
stock was soon trading like a software company, with much higher price-to-
earnings multiples than the rest of the auto industry and jumping from
roughly $50 billion in market cap to nearly $1 trillion.
Expanding the view of the customer is essential to winning. The
competitor who best serves the customer (with the best economics)
typically wins.
GM’S FUN BOLT
Disruptive thinking was central to Tesla’s culture. But new ideas and course
changing can seem deeply threatening, or simply weird, when they aren’t
ingrained in a company’s mindset and process. I expected and encountered
this when joining the board of General Motors in 2022. When I pushed for
an aggressive charging strategy, people looked at me as though I had three
heads. “Fueling? That’s what Exxon and Mobil do. We manufacture cars…”
True. Yet if competing automakers are finding new ways to connect with
customers and are building new businesses to service them, they’re more
likely to grow, leaving the others behind. Expanding the definition of the
product to the customer’s experience doesn’t merely create growth
opportunities. In some industries, it’s the path to survival.
The challenges that GM faced are probably more similar to those that
most businesses grapple with, compared to the Tesla case studies. Most
companies, after all, don’t follow the Algorithm, at least not yet. But most
businesses face transitions, whether adapting to growth, technological
change, or new competitors. In these trying circumstances, the Algorithm
can point the way.
At a company as big as General Motors, some of the most dramatic
changes develop as stand-alone initiatives. The high-speed effort to produce
the Hummer EV (Chapter 5) was a significant win—and a clear signal to
the rest of the massive company that new ideas are not only welcome but
can also get the funding and the support they deserve.
Around the time the Hummer EV rolled off the line, GM was exploring
possibilities for its next generation of electric car, the Bolt. Launched in
2016, the Bolt was GM’s learning laboratory for EVs. It involved building
out a new supply chain and adopting different manufacturing processes.
The original Bolt was a small and utilitarian EV. Yet it was crowned as
MotorTrend’s car of the year in 2017, and in the following years it
developed a large and devoted following. After it was withdrawn from the
market in 2021 to deal with battery issues, customers themselves sent many
ideas for the Bolt’s next iteration. They wanted more trunk space, a less
plasticky feel on the door handles, and dozens of other tweaks.
Traditionally at GM, most manufacturing adjustments focused on safety,
economy, utility, or manufacturing simplicity. These were not bad priorities
by any means. The key was to combine high quality with low cost. That
combination had pleased customers through the decades, especially when
combined with world-class design, like the tapered fins of the 1962 Cadillac
Coupe Deville.
But delving deeply into the customer experience involves more than cost
and quality. It demands a focus on the driver’s and passengers’ experience
in the car. It demands asking new questions, such as “Are the vehicles we
produce fun?”
This was an unusual question in the halls of General Motors. But it was
on Mark Reuss’s mind in 2022. Reuss, the president of the company, had
recently driven a Chinese car with an intriguing feature: a customizable
dashboard. Using its connectors, people could snap on their own stuff,
whether screens or mirrors or cupholders. The dashboard worked a bit like
Legos. Customers could summon their creativity and personalize their
dashboard. The feature, Reuss said, was the rage in China.
The customizable dashboard was fun. And Mark was determined to add
more fun to the Chevy Bolt. When the Bolt reemerged, it featured a longer
range and other upgrades in construction and performance. In addition, it
had fun elements, including the ability for owners to customize the interior
of their car with accessories, including a customizable dashboard.
GUIDANCE
The overall principle of expanding your product view to include the customer use
case is simple: Broaden the scope of the core product and ask about the much
longer and wider customer journey. Expand your aperture and ask these
questions: What is the customer doing in and around our product? And how can
we enhance the entire experience—ideally by building new offerings and revenue
streams?
To widen the view, it can help to widen even the vocabulary of what you’re
selling, often from a thing to a concept. For automotive industry, it’s the shift from
the vehicle to the entire journey or, in a more utilitarian vein, transportation.
But broadening the business to meet the customer’s needs involves more than
simple word changes. The execs, the engineers, the product people—in short,
everyone—need to join together to address what the customer wants or would
like every time they touch your product or service.
And very importantly, does this expanded view of the customer use case make
the difference between winning and losing a market (like convenient charging
networks for electric vehicles)? If it does, then pursue it as part of your product. If
it doesn’t make or break adoption, then seriously consider whether you should
pursue the broader product definition.
Walmart has been doing this for decades. It developed a footprint for its stores
that was wildly successful. They could have stopped there. But leaders at
Walmart started to ask, “Besides general merchandise, what else are our
customers purchasing weekly?”
When they opened their aperture, expanding more into their customers’ lives,
they saw groceries, pharmacy products, and gas as weekly purchases. They
determined that they had every right to participate in those categories. And the
experiments began: first grocery, then pharmacy, then gas. The result is that
Walmart customers have one-stop shopping for their weekly needs. This
expansion turned Walmart into one of the largest grocers, pharmacies, and gas
retailers in the world.
So what are your customers consuming in and around your product?
Attack this question like a systems thinker. Lead your teams to think not just of
the part of the process they define as their product but also of the whole system of
putting the product to use. That is the customer’s view of the product.
OceanofPDF.com