T
CHAPTER EIGHT
Inject Urgency and Accountability into
Your Organization
UESDAY  AT  THE  Palo Alto engineering center meant that Elon was
coming. He had recently read Tim Ferriss’s bestseller, The 4-Hour
Workweek, and he was determined to maximize his impact while spending
only one day a week at Tesla. (He fell just a bit short of that goal during my
time at Tesla, but got it down to a day and a half.)
Elon’s goal was to maximize his value, whether per minute or per day.
For this, he would focus on three or four pressing issues—and delegate
everything else.
He kept a running list in his head of the things that really mattered to the
company’s survival. They centered, almost exclusively, on the product: our
drivers’ experience in a Tesla. In this way, Elon followed Steve Jobs, who
kept a tight grip on the product, from design through manufacturing, even
as he ran the entire company. Elon felt the same way. The product was the
brand and, in Tesla’s case, the marketing. The product engaged the
customers and brought in revenue. The product was the essence of the
company. He believed that the product should be so good that it didn’t need
to be marketed (and thus wouldn’t need a sales force). Consequently, the to-
do list in Elon’s mind revolved relentlessly around the product—from
designing and manufacturing it to fixing it and enhancing it.
At Tesla we placed special emphasis on the parts of our product that
customers touched the most. Certain areas, such as seats, steering wheels,
and windshields, were fundamental to the experience. Drivers were
physically in constant contact with these components. They really mattered.
(We spent a ton of time on seats.) Other parts, like dashboards, were less
crucial, as long as they didn’t look cheap and plasticky.
Elon would zero in on two or three issues that he deemed critical. It
might be a problem—a manufacturing bottleneck or a mechanical glitch. Or
it could be an opportunity, like tripling the speed of the paint shop. In the
case of driver seats, we as a team were so unsatisfied with the seat in the
Model 3 that twelve months into production we were on the thirteenth
version of it. The pursuit of product perfection was relentless.
He assigned teams to tackle these challenges. On Tuesdays, he expected
progress reports. Teams would tell him about steps taken, learnings, and,
most importantly, results. However, these weekly sessions with the CEO
weren’t for mere status updates; they were problem-solving sessions.
This was what we called Elon’s “weekly cadence.” It was his
involvement, often intense, with the nitty-gritty of our automaking business.
I cannot think of a better way to light a fire under a team than to set a firm
goal with a deadline and make the team report on progress directly to the
CEO. Knowing what they would be facing on Tuesday kept everyone
focused and pushing forward. And because teams were presenting directly
to the CEO, they didn’t relent or make excuses. They brought their A-game
every time. This created an immediate sense of urgency and accountability
—which is the second cultural step of the Algorithm.
To work effectively with colleagues, whether attacking problems in a
weekly cadence or dealing with day-to-day issues, top management must
have a firm grasp of the details involved, whether it’s a technical issue, a
customer-relations challenge, or an international expansion. It’s important
to be able to discuss and examine these issues, and it’s not enough simply to
set a goal and a deadline. To create a meaningful dialogue and to hold
people accountable, the CEO must understand the problems they are
grappling with. In the best cases, the executive can contribute to the
solution.
The Tuesday meetings would include Elon and the senior leadership
team that provided Elon direct reports, which included me, the heads of
manufacturing and product, the CFO, and the leader responsible for
resolving the problem or reaching the goal. That person was speaking to a
very small audience, but principally to Elon.
The weekly cadence was one of Elon’s most effective time-management
tools. By running small teams on crucial issues and demanding weekly
progress reports, he could supercharge his best innovators and problem
fixers. It was a force multiplier. For a weekly meeting with the CEO, the
teams, including some of the brightest people in each domain, would give it
their all. They would research, experiment, and rack their brains, covering
every possibility and reaching for others, so that they could report to the
CEO at the Tuesday meeting that the issue was handled or the goal was on
track. They were well aware that they would be held accountable because if
there wasn’t progress, there was often a leadership change.
One especially thorny problem involved the second-row seating for the
Model X, our crossover SUV with falcon-wing doors. The original design
called for two captain’s chairs: comfortable seats, but for only one
passenger each. However, market research showed that parents preferred a
bench seat so that three kids could sit together.
It might have sounded like a simple fix. But the existing chassis lacked a
central attachment point for a bench seat. For safety, our team had to figure
out a way to secure the bench. The only other alternative would be to
remake the entire chassis, which would have consumed far too many dollars
and days.
For a few tense Tuesdays in 2016, a central item in Elon’s cadence was
this back-seat fixture in the Model X. It was holding up production and
sales. The root of the problem may have been a simple detail, a metal-to-
metal connection that had to be made. But it could sink the company if
those Model X’s weren’t selling to projection.
The team frantically searched for a solution. They stayed up late on
Mondays, preparing their report. The sessions were fraught. People were
frustrated, and short of sleep. It seemed as if they had hit a wall. There was
a lot of shouting. Despite the high pressure, the results were still invaluable.
The back-and-forths between Elon and the manufacturing team dealt
with levels of torque, mathematics, and metallurgy. He engaged with the
engineers on a fundamental level. He knew and understood what they were
facing. His questioning focused on finding a solution.
In one session, he was pushing the lead engineer on the gravitational
physics and pressures on a cross member in the seat structure.
“Do you know the formula?” Elon asked.
“Not off the top of my head,” the engineer replied.
“Well, I do,” Elon answered. He went to the board and drew out the
formula, forcing the engineer to solve the equation on the spot. And the
answer emerged.
The stories told in the hallways after the meeting were the force
multiplier: Elon had prepped for the session. The team needed to be one
step ahead of that. And especially the lead engineer.
The stories spread like wildfire. They set the bar high for work quality
and pace. The CEO’s involvement drove a weekly cadence of improvement.
I guarantee you that wasn’t happening at our competition, which made it
very hard to keep up with us.
The solution to the back-seat fixture in the Model X was maddeningly
elusive. But in that session, Elon came up with the answer. After going
through the team’s calculations, he discovered that they had in fact solved
the problem. Yet they didn’t realize they had because they were measuring
the wrong variable.
In this issue, like many, Elon was operating in his sweet spot.
Metallurgy and mathematics were central to his ultimate mission—to send
humans to Mars, a passion of his for decades. He was strong in those
domains, and he continued to study the manufacturing specifics of Tesla in
great detail.
Yet even after solving the back-seat fixture, that Model X continued to
torment us. We produced the first 1,200 units of the car, but we couldn’t
ship them because of a production glitch: The doors weren’t properly
aligned. These luxury cars would be selling for $120,000, and the doors, of
course, had to be perfect. The cars were piling up outside the factory—and
not bringing in a single dollar of desperately needed revenue.
This was a time for urgency and accountability, if there ever was one.
Elon and I walked back the entire length of the production line, which was
more than a mile. We were swimming upstream, looking for the spot in the
process where the problem emerged.
It wasn’t hard to see. Halfway up the line we came upon a pile of the
car’s falcon-wing doors. They just didn’t fit, we were told.
It didn’t seem to make sense. The calculations on the design were
precise. Each part was perfectly sized. But when it came to putting the
doors on, they just didn’t fit.
We were all enormously frustrated, but all of us, including Elon and me,
dove into the problem. This was the first time that I slept for nights on end
at the factory.
One day I was looking at the line. The cars rode along on trays as the
workers and robots attached pieces to them. At the end of the line, they
came down from the tray to the ground, and they seemed to settle just a bit
on their wheels. This raised a question for me. I asked the lead engineer if
his team calculated door alignment while the cars were sitting on the trays
or on their wheels. He looked into it and came back with the answer. They
were calculated on the trays. Once they adjusted for the weight on the
wheels, they were able to fix the problem (chassis alignment), and we could
start selling our Model X.
That production problem posed a challenge to the entire team. It was all
hands on deck. Everyone’s brain was focused on finding a solution. When
team members see the CEO and the president of the company working
eighteen-hour days on a problem and sleeping at the factory, they put their
all into it. It creates an atmosphere of urgent problem-solving.
IN  OUR  MONTHS  of Production Hell, when manufacturing in our robot-
powered line was paralyzed, Elon’s weekly cadence focused on ramping up
production and increasing numerical goals. First it was to produce a
hundred cars per week. And then five hundred, and then a thousand.
Sometimes, Elon’s method was persistent to the point of obsession.
There was one area of the plant, for example, that was screwing up badly.
Elon had the head of production send him an email every hour until the
problem was solved. For seven days, the poor guy had to set an alarm, sleep
for forty-five minutes, and then gather the latest data in the following few
minutes for his email. This was an example of taking a good thing—
aggressive goals and accountability—a bit too far.
In recent years, more of Elon’s focus moved to autonomy. Tesla’s
survival, he believed, hinged upon its transition to autonomous driving. One
of the key metrics, and a focus in weekly meetings, was the number of
miles that a Tesla could drive by itself without human intervention. Every
week, teams would report. Each time a human had to take the wheel
represented a failure of autonomy. It highlighted a problem to address. And
the team was well aware that that problem had better be fixed by next
Tuesday. (Tesla’s progress in autonomous driving has for years failed to
deliver on Elon’s upbeat promises. To be fair, the problem is monstrously
complex, closer to that of a Mars mission than to a bench support in a
Model X.)
The weekly cadence is a powerful tool for problem-solving and
innovation. But the key is not that it’s a weekly meeting. What’s important
is the energetic participation of the CEO—and the accountability that this
person demands.
This process requires deep study of the company, whether in retail or
software or electric cars. Otherwise, it’s hard to have a meaningful back-
and-forth. I had to work hard to get up to speed at Tesla, which was my first
job in the auto manufacturing industry. I was lucky enough to get tutorials
from the leaders of each domain at Tesla. The cofounder, JB Straubel,
tutored me in electric cars. Our lead designer, Franz von Holzhausen, taught
me aerodynamics. Doug Field, our engineering leader, taught me power
electronics and the physics of how the car responds to driving conditions.
Although I was by no means at Elon’s level in those technical issues,
every little bit helped. I learned enough to understand the problems, ask
smart questions, and suggest next steps. Since leaving Tesla, I’ve carried
elements of the weekly cadence into every one of my ventures. I meet
weekly with our CEOs on the core issues in their business, seeking to
model the same type of collaboration and communication they need to have
with their teams. It’s fundamental for working as a team to set and achieve
distinct goals.
This can reshape a company culture in two ways. First, it democratizes,
because the top executive is working side by side with engineers or
technicians. They’re attacking a problem together. At the same time, it feeds
off the hierarchy. The CEO, after all, is not just working on the project, but
also demanding results—and is far too informed by this point to be fooled
by bullshit. This culture of knowledge and urgency drives problem-solving
and innovation.
CADENCE FOR START-UPS
The rigor of a cadence—whether weekly or at some other interval—is not
only useful for addressing problems but also for starting companies from
scratch. At DVx, we built an entire framework around these rigorous
meetings, all of them focused on goals and benchmarks for start-ups and
early-stage companies. It became a disciplined approach for developing a
concept into a company, pressing forward with it—and deciding promptly
whether to pursue it or to pull the plug.
Each of our ventures starts as an idea. It might be helping millions of
small companies manage and optimize their heating and air-conditioning. It
could be creating an AI tool to value used cars by analyzing photographs.
As each idea progresses, it is put through a sequence of stage gates inspired
by Elon’s weekly cadence. We have timing and quality metrics on
scorecards, and we use them to create a high-pressure environment
demanding both urgency and accountability. We hold weekly one-on-one
meetings with a focused agenda: What milestone are we working toward,
and what’s standing in the way of achieving it?
We keep each potential start-up on a tight leash. They have small
budgets, and every month the CEO must provide a concise overview of
financials, milestones achieved, upcoming goals, next steps, and areas
where support is needed. Ventures that fall short of our metrics are dropped
quickly so that we can move on to another project.
A speedy and rigorous vetting system has numerous benefits. It enables
us to cast widely for ideas. We can even try out some that might seem
outlandish, or like bad bets. If they pass our stress test, they might turn out
to be excellent bets. (Some of the best ideas are the ones few believed
would work.) Conversely, if they fail, we haven’t lost much money or time
—and, as a bonus, we come away with new knowledge and contacts. If a
key technology advances or a market shifts, we can return to the idea. The
work is not lost.
Running a start-up incubator at speed requires constant learning. Each
start-up is like a graduate seminar on hyper-speed. There are technology
challenges, new markets to explore, regulatory issues. In order to provide
smart and timely feedback, and to partner with the team to navigate the
challenges, study is indispensable.
I push this fast and urgent methodology, whether as an executive,
investor, or board member. I think it’s a crucial approach for allocating our
resources and our energy behind ideas that will work—while also
developing them quickly.
STASH—A CEO PUSHES AN AI PROJECT
One shining example is an AI project headed up by Brandon Krieg, the
founder and co-CEO of Stash, the personal-finance app. From my seat on
the board of directors, I got a close look as Brandon and his team raced to
develop an AI for investing advice. It was a model of urgency and
accountability.
In his twenties, Brandon had cofounded EdgeTrade, a pioneer in
electronic trading. Later, he went to Australia’s Macquarie Securities, where
he headed up global electronic trading. His years in direct-to-consumer
banking taught him a lot about how people handle their money.
What he saw was a stark division between haves and have-nots. More
than 40 percent of Americans, he knew, did not have cash on hand for a
hypothetical car repair. Most of those people had income. It wasn’t enough,
clearly. But if they had a financial adviser, as rich people do, could they
manage to save a bit each week, if only a few dollars, and build savings?
Working on a whiteboard in 2015, Brandon and his cofounder, Ed
Robinson, drew up a plan for a company focused on people in this cash-
poor segment of the market. The objective: help them save and invest.
They called their New York–based start-up Stash. The financial app they
developed helped users put a percentage of their earnings into savings. It
also offered investing advice. The company generated a following. But its
dynamic growth came a couple of years later, when Stash issued debit cards
with a unique benefit: With every purchase, the user would receive a tiny
slice of equity, a fraction of a share in a publicly held company. The idea
took off, and Stash grew to $100 million in annual recurring revenue.
But fast growth, as we saw at Tesla, creates bottlenecks. One area where
they’re most likely to appear is in customer service. By 2024, Brandon
recalled, the Stash helpline was receiving ten thousand calls per month.
Customers were asking about their money, stocks, cryptocurrencies,
retirement plans, interest rates. Some just had questions about the app itself.
The consistent takeaway was that people needed financial guidance.
“We have a huge financial literacy problem,” Brandon says, “and the
average person has no one to call.”
He pictured someone firmly in the middle of the economy, maybe the
administrator for a dental group. That person might be wondering whether
to finance a car or lease one, or whether to withdraw money from an IRA to
pay a credit-card bill. But unlike the wealthy, she had no one to rely on for
sound advice. The internet was the default option, and it was teeming with
hucksters and misinformation.
Stash didn’t have the resources to handle the thousands of calls. So
Brandon decided to experiment with automation. He and his team had
already gathered a wealth of customer insights and data from the call
centers. He took the transcripts from thousands of service calls and dumped
them into a basic AI foundation model. He wanted to see how close it came
to delivering the right answer. In quite a few cases, it showed promise.
This was enough to convince him that building an AI for customer
service was a worthwhile objective, even a necessary one. An entire sector
of the investing public badly needed advice. Wrong decisions could leave
them broke and in debt. Right ones might spell economic security. Only a
machine could provide the service to millions of them.
By 2024, when Brandon was envisioning the system, he trusted that
customizable AI had advanced far enough to handle language, whether
shorthand, mistyped, or slangy. It would be able to analyze the issue, search
through the data, and, hopefully, provide each customer with smart,
accurate, and helpful information and advice.
Building the AI engine he hoped for would have to be fast—and intense.
“It was a big, audacious project,” he says. He’d have to learn a lot.
Brandon knew he would need a strong technical partner. He pulled aside
one of his most gifted engineers, Joel Parrish, who was leading Android
development at Stash. He outlined his plan, and Joel agreed to join him on
it.
Brandon hadn’t coded in a long time. But he knew Python, the general-
purpose software program, well enough to work closely with Joel.
“We started working around the clock,” Brandon says. “I started pulling
in people, carefully and selectively.” He wanted a very small team.
“Otherwise, our schedules would fill up with meetings.”
One of the costliest and most time-consuming processes, whether in
software or manufacturing, is retrofitting. It often requires tearing apart
much of the work done. So without adding too many people to the small
development team, Brandon wanted input from the different specialists. The
most important was compliance. “These were going to be public
communications in a highly regulated industry,” he says. “We had to be sure
the model had guardrails.”
He included the chief compliance officer, Kate Ring, in the small
development team, the group he called “Ninjas.”
The range of this AI investment coach had to be immense. It had to
master the complexity of language and phrasing from users, many of whom
only vaguely knew what they were talking about. Many of them would not
know financial lingo or even be comfortable typing. The digital coach
would have to converse in spoken colloquial English.
It would also have to offer sound advice on a dizzying range of issues.
After all, the saving and investment advice hinged on a host of personal and
family matters. The advice for each person had to be custom fitted to their
needs, circumstances, risk tolerance, and time horizon. Naturally, the advice
also had to be smart, clearly communicated, respectful of the users’ privacy,
and impeccable from a regulatory point of view. This required massive
training of the system. “We had to boil the ocean,” Brandon says.
Within a month, the Ninjas had a prototype. Built upon an open-source
AI platform, it answered questions and offered advice, and it sounded
surprisingly human. But there was still work to be done to train the machine
in order to make it smarter, nimbler, and more focused. The team
relentlessly kept targeting performance goals.
The app launched in early 2025. Users took to it at once. And their
interactions provided new mountains of training data. The improvement
never stops, and the development continues. A team of seven works full-
time on the app. The latest project is an AI focused entirely on compliance.
Brandon, meanwhile, remains fully engaged: “In my entire career, I’ve
never had so much fun.”
In building the AI investment coach, the Stash team not only followed
the urgency and accountability step of the Algorithm. They also expanded
the product to the customers’ experience. And for Stash to provide the
smartest financial service, they realized, the customers had to know more.
Stash had to become an education company. And as the AI team gathers and
processes the ever-growing trove of customer interactions with their app,
the digital coach continues to grow smarter.
Injecting urgency and accountability is the secret ingredient here. I
believe it might be the most powerful ingredient of the Algorithm.
In Stash’s case, the principle is urgency. This was on full display as
Brandon returned to founder mode and led by example. Working with a
small team, he rapidly developed a full-scale AI investing coach. He
injected urgency, holding everyone accountable, including himself, for
goals and deliverables every week.
The Tesla example of Elon leading weekly sessions highlights the same
two ingredients: urgency and accountability. Getting teams to present to the
CEO pushes an entire organization toward its goals.
GUIDANCE
This one is simple. What is the biggest problem or challenge your company
faces? What would fix it? Who in your company (or elsewhere) is best positioned
to carry it out?
Have a meeting and invite a small group of people, each of them involved in a
way that makes a difference. Set an action plan and goal, and meet in a week for
a progress report. You’re off and running.
OceanofPDF.com