N
CHAPTER NINE
Eat Your Own Dog Food
OT  LONG  AGO , I was speaking to a group of finance executives,
including the CEO of a major bank where I have an account. I have
the bank’s app on my phone, and it drives me crazy. It’s glitchy and a
nightmare to navigate. So I was interested to see how this executive
responded when I asked people in the audience to raise their hand if they
used their own company’s smartphone app. About half the hands went up,
but not his.
I wasn’t surprised. It seemed to me in this case and countless others that
if someone in charge had experienced what the customer does, they’d work
hard to fix the problems. That’s the central point of using your own product.
It brings pain points to the surface. It’s the best way I know to find out what
needs fixing.
It’s called eating your own dog food, and it’s the third key element of the
special sauce behind the Algorithm. It means undergoing your customers’
experience. The phrase originated in the tech economy in the 1980s, but the
concept is much older. In building Walmart, the company’s founder, Sam
Walton, traveled from one of his stores to the next. He strolled through
aisles to see how items were presented and what the customers were
buying. To get another perspective, he’d even take coffee and doughnuts to
truckers who shipped to Walmart. Sitting down with them, he’d listen to
their stories about operations at various stores.
Today, examples of executives researching their own operations are so
familiar that they feel almost like corporate gospel. But if they’re so
familiar, why did only half the executives in that finance crowd raise their
hands when asked if they used their own app? I see this often. People know
they’re supposed to experience their own products and services, but they
don’t get around to it. For many, I suspect, that type of research fits into an
ever-expanding dossier, along with flossing teeth and working out: “Things
I Know I Should Do but Don’t Have Time For.”
But trying your own offerings is not simply a box to check. It’s the most
basic method for understanding what value you’re actually delivering. It’s
basic research. And that research should also include sampling your
competition’s offerings. If they include features that are superior to yours,
you’d better know about them. You can be sure that your customers do.
One great advantage of this research is that it has an extraordinarily
short feedback loop. If you hire a research firm to run focus groups or
conduct customer surveys, you might not get back the results for months.
But if you take a test car for a drive or eat the lunch special at your new
café, you’ll know within hours that the wipers don’t adjust quite right to a
misting rain or that the pulled-pork burrito has too much chili powder. Your
team can get working on those problems immediately—long before the
consultants have begun drawing up their first surveys.
The other advantage is that the information you gain is direct. In
customer surveys, there’s a layer of doubt. Are customers saying what they
really believe or what they think the questioner wants to hear? Are they
holding back on something they couldn’t figure out because it might make
them look dumb? When you eat your own dog food, these doubts vanish.
At Tesla, as I’ve written, Elon was laser-focused on operational issues
when I met him in 2015. Yet he had taken his eye off the customers’ car-
buying experience. He didn’t realize that they weren’t getting callbacks
after test-drives. I took test-drives myself and identified the problem. It
ultimately helped me get my job there.
Despite that oversight, when I got to Tesla, I saw that living the
customer experience was deeply embedded in the culture. The company had
a fleet of seventy-five “engineering” cars. Employees could take them out,
like a book from a lending library, and use them for a few days. At the Tesla
design center at SpaceX headquarters were more Teslas for loan, as well as
a collection of competitors’ cars.
I remember getting emails from friends. They’d seen our chief designer,
Franz von Holzhausen, driving a Land Rover or a Mercedes in the
neighborhood. They wondered what was going on. Had he switched
companies? No, I reassured them. Just eating the competition’s dog food.
JB Straubel, Tesla’s cofounder, insisted in one of our weekly
management meetings in 2016 that each of us should pull a car off the
factory lot each night to drive home. Elon hopped onto the idea and said
that not only should we drive them but that we should also send our
feedback to him each morning. As chief product officer (among his many
hats), he’d process the feedback and work with the teams to take action.
That daily feedback on the experience led to rapid improvements in our
software interface, our ride quality, and even the tint of the roof glass in the
Model X.
At a Lululemon board meeting in 2017, the president, Celeste Burgoyne,
and I were lamenting to each other that it was hard to get the true customer
experience. When I slipped into Tesla stores, the employees would
recognize me. In foreign markets, they often knew I was coming. So they
shined up the store and brought out their A-game. That made it hard to
know if what I was experiencing in my visit was representative of what was
really happening.
Celeste had the same problem. So she suggested a brilliant solution: We
could visit each other’s stores. They wouldn’t know who we were or if we
were coming. And because our stores were often very close to each other in
retail areas, it would be pretty easy to pull this off.
We agreed to give each other write-ups, just quick emails with
observations of what we saw. Good and bad, and maybe a suggestion for
improvement. Super simple.
We started while I was still at Tesla, and my visits to Lululemon stores
continue to this day. Celeste is able to digest the feedback that I send, sort
out what is useful to her and her teams, and take action.
Not long ago, I was walking by Lululemon’s flagship store in New York
on my way to a meeting. I had an hour of padding in my schedule, so I
decided to do a secret shopping visit for Celeste. It was midafternoon on a
Wednesday, and I noticed a long line waiting for checkout. I went down to
the men’s section and noticed that, by Celeste’s and Lulu’s standards, the
store looked untidy. Clothes hadn’t been returned to racks, and they were
strewn around, making the store look more like T.J. Maxx than Lululemon.
I also noticed that there weren’t many Lulu team members on the floor
assisting customers.
I picked out a few items and went back up to the checkout line. The line
was now longer, and people were complaining they’d been waiting for more
than twenty minutes. Needless to say, these were not Celeste’s standards for
her stores. More, maintaining excellence was crucially important in a
flagship store, which symbolizes the brand for customers.
I asked for the manager. He appeared after about ten minutes. When I let
him know that I was a board member, his face sank.
“What are your staffing levels today?” I asked.
“Fourteen people, currently, about three short of what I need because our
labor models aren’t correct,” he said.
“I count five people on the floor. Where are the other nine?”
“In the back working e-comm orders.”
“Why aren’t you monitoring the demand load on the floor and pulling
people out of the back to help?”
“You’re right; I should be.”
In that short exchange, I discovered three things that would have been
impossible to discover if the store had been primed for a visit from Celeste.
First, the staffing models given by corporate were off and needed to be
corrected. Second, the e-comm orders were pulling staff away from
customers. And third, we had a manager who was not on top of his game
and was spending more time in the back than on the sales floor, leading his
team.
Normally, my Lululemon store visits are fantastic experiences. But this
time it wasn’t. I shot a quick note to Celeste with the three observations.
Within twenty-four hours, she wrote back. She’d corrected the staffing
models, was designing a new approach for pulling e-comm orders, and had
already had a discussion with the store manager and the regional manager.
This was right on brand for Celeste: Create a feedback loop, take in the
feedback, and then take action.
Like Celeste, Lululemon’s CEO, Calvin McDonald, also eats his own
dog food. Calvin is a competitive triathlete and is constantly training for his
next IronMan competition. How he does this while leading a $10 billion
international company and being a husband and dad to four kids, I don’t
know. I find him inspiring.
Because he’s training every day, he insists on being in our prototypes for
running gear. In turn, shoes, shirts, shorts, and even socks get his keen eye
on performance and improvements needed each day. He writes up his
feedback and sends it to the product and design teams, providing them with
guidance and insights in real time. By the time the running line is released
each season, it has Calvin’s fingerprints all over it.
Calvin and Celeste are leaders who are personally engaged in their
product and in the stores that deliver it. Their direct approach minimizes the
sugarcoating that execs typically get and elevates the performance of their
organization.
During my time at Tesla, I formalized this discipline, calling it my 20
percent rule. One day every week I would be away from the office,
experiencing one part or another of a customer’s journey.
I advocate this as a board member, too. At General Motors, I encourage
young leaders and execs to get their hands on every GM product they can. I
also do this. For me, it’s a steady diet of GM cars and trucks that show up in
our driveway for months-long evaluations. Mary Barra, GM’s CEO, craves
the feedback, and she asks for the good, the bad, and the ugly. She wants it
to be frank and actionable.
I remember how impressed I was when I hopped into my first electric
Cadillac Lyriq. Yet there was one off-putting element: an on-off ignition
button. These are a vestige of traditional cars, but electric cars shouldn’t
need them. They “know” to turn on when you open the door and sit down,
and to turn off when you get out. Ridding the cars of those unnecessary
switches would not only cut costs. It would also signal to customers that
GM was no longer anchored in its traditional internal-combustion business.
Mary understood. So did the head of product at the time, Doug Parks. The
change was made quickly, and it came from eating our own dog food.
About a year ago, I was driving in an Escalade SUV from Denver to my
home in Aspen. It was snowing and very hard to see. It was my first drive in
the vehicle, and I was struggling to find a control for the automatic high-
beam headlights. I had to pull over and look for a YouTube video on the
subject.
That led to a new doctrine for me. Anytime a customer needs YouTube
to find a switch or understand how something works, the design needs a
tweak. A YouTube search is the equivalent of a red light blinking. But that’s
a problem you might not learn until you set off on a dog food–eating
research mission.
In this context, I define “customer” very widely. It includes anyone who
touches the product, from the laboratory and factories that produce it to the
stores and websites that sell it. Looking at the product from each of these
perspectives, I find a steady stream of operational issues to address and
features to improve. And, importantly, if something goes wrong, I’m less
likely to be surprised.
One of my techniques on my 20 percent days is to ask this question of
people at every step of the process: If you were running this company, what
would you change? This is a way to harvest not only their experience and
perspective but also their ideas.
During a store visit outside of Paris, a store manager answered my
standard question with “If I had your job, I would create competition to
reach or exceed our sales metrics among the stores. Show them weekly
what their ranking is.”
That was a fantastic idea. And because I had asked, and he was brave
enough to answer, the quick feedback loop went into action. A week later,
our sales-ops team had automated a weekly email sent to each store
manager. It ranked each store by their sales internationally (the whole
system). Then it ranked each store within a country. We drew a line at the
50 percent level.
Suddenly, stores would pull out the stops to not be below that line. And
we saw sales growth and creativity that we hadn’t seen in months. All from
asking for feedback as a habit.
The unvarnished feedback often leads to insights that I need.
GUIDANCE
As a senior leader, the only things you have at your disposal are resources and
the power to allocate those resources to the right things. Asking colleagues what
needs changing makes them your eyes and ears. Their insights enable you to see
problems (and opportunities) that you might not through normal channels. And
with their input, you can allocate resources to solve problems (or create new
product features or opportunities).
The principle of eating your own dog food is a simple one. As a leader, you are
creating a firsthand and extremely rapid feedback loop for yourself.
It also helps to create a culture around continuous improvement. When you
show up with firsthand insights, word gets around. The boss is engaged with the
product and with delivering it. Team members start to quickly recognize that they
probably want to be ahead of the boss. So they start eating their own dog food as
well. The flywheel of improvement starts there and begins to spin faster.
OceanofPDF.com