T
INTRODUCTION
HIS  IS  A  book about a set of principles and processes that can make any
business, regardless of size or industry, grow exponentially. I first
learned about them from Elon Musk during the three years (2015–2018) I
was president of Tesla. But this is not a book about Elon. Nor is it a book
about his political or social positions. I wrote this book to give you an
inside glimpse into what makes Tesla and SpaceX so innovative. My hope
is that leaders of companies big and small can apply these principles and
create a new era of innovation and job creation. That is what this book is
about.
That said, Elon’s operational methods for simplifying, accelerating,
removing steps, and questioning requirements—his Algorithm—not only
fueled spectacular growth at Tesla but also laid out a valuable blueprint for
growing companies and innovating in the twenty-first century. I have since
used these principles with great success in my work with many other
companies, including Lululemon and General Motors, where I currently sit
on their respective boards. By the time you are done reading, you will be
able to apply them to your own work.
I  FIRST  MET  Elon Musk after being introduced by Sheryl Sandberg, who at
the time was the chief operating officer at Facebook. Elon was looking hard
for a president, and Sheryl told him she knew a guy. In our first assignment
out of college, Sheryl’s late husband, Dave Goldberg, and I were young
consultants optimizing operations at meatpacking plants in the Great Plains.
It was a formative experience for both of us (working in a meatpacking
plant was a surprising place to learn the Toyota Production System), and it
led me onto an entrepreneurial path focused on making things work better.
Sheryl set up my first meeting with Elon, and we hit it off immediately.
I jump-started the conversation and asked Elon what he was looking for,
and why now—what was the catalyst to seek out a number two? Oh, and
why not a big company car guy? Tesla was ready to hit $2 billion in annual
revenue.
He immediately jumped on the big company car guy idea. “That’s
exactly what I don’t need. I need a fellow entrepreneur.” He needed
someone who knew how to disrupt because they’ve done it before.
Someone who knew how to allocate capital. Someone who has been on the
brink of running out of cash. Those people, he said, have judgment, are
decisive, and move fast. “I’ll never find that in a big company car exec.”
He had a point.
Next, he dove right into a case study, asking me if I’d ever seen a
problem like he was seeing on the manufacturing floor with the Model S.
Skipping the small talk was fine, and this case interview was right up
my alley. I asked him if there was a place in the process where the unused
parts were piling up. This was a crucial marker in any manufacturing
process, one that Dave and I had learned in our meatpacking days. If the
Tesla team zeroed in on inventory backups, I told him, they’d probably find
the root cause of the problem. That signal locates the problem. The next
step is finding the root cause of the constraint. That requires painstaking
work upstream to determine why the system is slowing at that very spot.
As I asked more questions, I could tell he was zeroing in on a possible
cause. I hadn’t been in his factory and couldn’t see what he had seen, but
after an hour or so of back and forth, he had ideas on what was slowing the
line. My goal was to show him the thinking process. It involved attacking a
problem not with random fury but systematically.
An hour or more flew by. I was having a blast, and it seemed he was,
too. Within a few minutes of meeting, we were neck-deep in a problem
together and working hard to pinpoint how to solve it. Once we got to a few
options on what the root cause might be, he thanked me and said he wanted
to go to the line to test out our thesis.
A few weeks later, Elon called me. His team had followed my advice
and fixed the glitches in the Model S line. He wondered if I could come
down to his office at SpaceX, in Los Angeles, and discuss other issues he
was facing at Tesla.
Sheryl had advised me not to hesitate if he asked me to visit, so I said
yes, I’d see him in a few days. No way I was going to miss a trip to a rocket
factory.
Soon, I was pulling into a parking space at SpaceX in Hawthorne with
my name on it. Elon’s assistant met me at the door. Emma Gallagher had
prepped me to bring a passport (entry to SpaceX is limited, and security is
tight due to government restrictions). After the security clearance, Emma
took me to a coffee station right on the edge of the factory floor. I was in
nerd heaven watching a rocket engine part being CNC’d right in front of me
from a massive block of titanium.
From there, Emma took me to Elon’s desk, another huge slab of titanium
(one of the coolest desks I’ve seen), introduced us, and we dove right in
again.
He told me about his most pressing problem. It had to do with sales. At
that point in 2015, even as it was producing great cars, Tesla was in a
precarious position. Investor confidence was crucial, and sales for the
current quarter weren’t even close to what the company had promised Wall
Street. He needed to fix the problem in a hurry.
I was in the process of selling my latest start-up and had some free time.
I told Elon I’d be happy to drill down on the sales issue. So, en route from
Los Angeles to Boston, I stopped at Chicago’s O’Hare Airport and met his
head of sales operations, Zean Nielsen.
In a conference room at O’Hare, Zean outlined the sales process on a
whiteboard. The central element, he said, was the test-drive. Most of the
people coming into the store had never driven an electric car before, much
less a Tesla. When they hit the accelerator, the car took off like a rocket.
They loved the feel and the experience. A good number of customers went
into the office right after their test-drive and bought a car. Others left their
details, and the sales team followed up. The cars practically sold
themselves, except for the stubborn fact that not nearly enough of them
were doing it.
To figure out what was amiss in the sales process, I had to go through it
myself. Much like walking the factory floor to look for where inventory
was piling up, I needed to walk the sales floor. Over the following week, I
went to eight Tesla stores and took test-drives. I gave each store a different
email address so that I wouldn’t be flagged as a test-driving weirdo. Then I
waited for follow-ups. None came.
This was a problem, but also an opportunity. I asked Zean to dig through
the customer data and find out how many others were like the eight versions
of me—potential customers who had taken test-drives but received no
follow-up. It turned out there were five thousand of them. The root of this
problem, it seemed, had to do with incentives. Tesla’s salespeople were
rewarded for leads, bringing customers in for those magical test-drives. But
they got no commission on sales, so there was little impetus to follow up.
I asked Zean if we could halt all test-drives until those five thousand
potential customers got a callback. He made it happen that day. Within
days, sales spiked. With cars jumping off the lots, Tesla was back on track
to make its quarterly numbers.
I was elated—and then it struck me: I didn’t even work for the company,
and I’d made a major decision without first discussing it with the CEO. I
called Elon, recounted the whole story, and apologized for vastly
overstepping my authority. “I’ve been a CEO for twenty years and I forgot
that I wasn’t the CEO in this situation,” I told him. “My bad.”
He was silent. This is something Elon does, and it’s unnerving. But I
didn’t know him yet and wasn’t sure how to interpret the silence. I’d say a
full minute went by, which felt like an eternity. Then he laughed and said,
“You know, I think you’re going to fit in just fine here.” Within weeks, I
was president of Tesla, running operations under Elon.
Prior to Tesla, I had founded and sold six different start-ups. I had two
decades of experience in innovation, efficiency management and
optimization, and applying lean principles in my own companies. I saw
each inefficiency as an opportunity to innovate. After a neighbor backed
into my wife’s car, for example, I learned firsthand about the painfully long
repair times at auto-body shops. This led me to launch a more efficient and
customer-focused model. The lean formula worked, and we quickly
expanded Sterling Collision Repair to seventy shops and hundreds of
millions of dollars in revenue nationwide before selling the company to
Allstate Insurance Company.
When I started at Tesla, I assumed that Elon and I looked at work
processes from much the same perspective. This was true, but only to a
degree. The company had gone from a start-up to a large manufacturer
without really defining how to solve problems and scale. Instead, incredible
talent and creativity in the moment drove many breakthroughs. But as Tesla
grew, the whole team began to define an entire operating system that
emphasized speed and simplicity. The objective: exponential growth. Elon
called this formula “the Algorithm.”
The Algorithm worked. The following thirty months were a period of
hypergrowth for Tesla and intense learning for me. During that time, we
broadened our market by launching the falcon-wing Model X, followed by
the more affordable Model 3. We dramatically expanded battery production,
going from zero to world leadership. We built Gigafactory Shanghai, the
first fully foreign-owned car factory in China, and grew revenue by a factor
of ten, from $2 billion to $20 billion. Despite all that success, I had to leave
Tesla.
When Walter Isaacson was working on his best-selling biography Elon
Musk, he interviewed me at length. I told him about the painful
conversations I’d had with Elon about his mental-health struggles, how
sometimes he wouldn’t, or couldn’t, get to his feet. One time, in a story
Isaacson included in his book, I had to lie down on the floor with Elon to
get his approval for a web-page design.
These issues made my life a lot less pleasant, and the amazing highs of
working with Elon—there were many—gave way to lows. One night my
wife told me that the job was changing my personality and that I was
coming home angry. So, in 2018, I left. I took everything I’d learned at
Tesla, including the Algorithm, to a host of other ventures.
Later, when Isaacson’s biography came out, I did a couple of events with
him. At one, I had the chance to be the interviewer. I asked him about his
coverage of the Algorithm. He had included important parts of it, but
largely in summary. Isaacson had been a CEO before, at Time Inc. and
CNN. Didn’t he consider this to be valuable content?
He agreed that it was. It didn’t fit into a biography, he said, but instead
deserved its own book—and suggested that I write it.
If you’ve read books or business journalism about Tesla or SpaceX,
you’ve no doubt come across references to the Algorithm and a few of its
features. Speed is essential. Rules are to be questioned and, occasionally,
broken. The Algorithm, you might think, works only for Elon Musk. He’s
the exception, a genius entrepreneur virtually untethered by the forces and
rules that the rest of us bow to on Earth. He’s the guy, after all, whose
burning goal is to send humans to Mars.
My objective in writing this book is to introduce the Algorithm as a set
of principles and practices that can work for any business, regardless of size
or industry. These are invaluable tools—essential ones—for thriving in the
coming decades. The Algorithm was designed to supercharge speed,
efficiency, innovation, and growth. How many businesses don’t want, or
need, a strong boost in those four areas? And how many can survive if their
competitors adopt these lessons and dominate their market?
That’s why I’m including case studies from both inside and outside
Tesla. I’ll detail each component of the Algorithm with case studies from
my years working with Elon, but I’ll also include examples from other
types of businesses—from restaurant kitchens to software start-ups. For
leaders running these operations, the elements of the Algorithm are hardly
rocket science. They’re simply smarter ways to get things done.
Although Elon Musk is a central figure in this book, both as a
charismatic leader and the architect of the Algorithm, many of the
breakthrough ideas in these pages come from others: engineers, technicians,
and physicists. This is an important point: It debunks the common notion
that Tesla and SpaceX are unlike “normal” companies because they’re run
by an eccentric founder with stratospheric goals. Much of the genius in
Musk’s companies comes from the legions of smart people empowered by
the Algorithm. They’re chasing stretch goals with free license to question
everything and innovate boldly. No enterprise needs Elon Musk for that.
You’ll no doubt recognize aspects of the social media and political Elon
in these stories. He has an outsize personality, with unbounded confidence
and extraordinary vision—along with glaring blind spots. But the focus of
this book is on what he can teach us about running and growing companies.
In Part I of the book, we tackle each of the five steps of the Algorithm:
1. Question every requirement.
2. Delete every possible step in a process.
3. Simplify and optimize.
4. Accelerate cycle time.
5. Automate last.
The stories illustrating these points will take us from the factory floor at
Tesla to the kitchen of Alinea, the Michelin three-star restaurant in Chicago.
Embedded in many of these examples is the relentless drive to ask a
question: Why is this necessary? It could be a rule, a custom, or something
long accepted as axiomatic. But the questioning often leads to efficiency
gains, and occasionally to dramatic breakthroughs.
Occasionally, delving into the why leads not just to improvements and
efficiencies but also to entirely new approaches, even new businesses. We
finish Part I with a chapter on examples of this radical rethinking, one from
Tesla and one from my start-up incubator, DVx Ventures. Each of these
examples features nearly every step of the Algorithm. In both cases they
lead to new formulations and possibilities.
We’ll move on in Part II to three cultural practices at Tesla that
supplement the Algorithm:
1. Expanding the definition of the product to encompass the customer’s
entire experience. In Tesla’s case, part of the product is the charging
infrastructure, because without it the customer is miserable.
2. Urgency and accountability to the CEO in solving key problems. The
example at Tesla is what we called the “weekly cadence.” Every
Tuesday, Elon would be expecting engineers to give him detailed
progress reports on the two or three most pressing problems.
3. Eating your own dog food. (I might never have gotten my job at Tesla
if Elon had bothered to take Teslas for test-drives and monitor the
follow-up messages, or lack thereof.)
The Algorithm features a set of best practices, yet one overarching idea
infuses them all: Question the status quo. The more entrenched the norms,
the greater the chances that people haven’t questioned the assumptions
behind them for a long time. This is where the question “Why?” becomes
important. If you go through a complex process and ask for the reason or
justification for each of the dozens or hundreds of steps, many times the
answer will be “That’s the way we’ve always done it.” Sometimes it turns
out to make good sense. But not always, not by a long shot. The simple
questioning of the status quo is fundamental both to the Algorithm and to
business improvement and discovery.
The framework’s value extends beyond optimizing business processes,
achieving exponential growth, and boosting profits—all highly desirable
outcomes. It has the potential to unleash a torrent of innovation and
efficiency throughout our entire economy. It could help us build housing,
develop medicines, and grow the food we need faster and cleaner. Elon’s
ambitions may be interplanetary, but his Algorithm can work wonders for
life on Earth. It is with this hope that I’m writing this book—with thanks to
Elon and Walter for the inspiration.
OceanofPDF.com
PART I
Principles of the Algorithm
OceanofPDF.com