I
WHAT’S NEXT
N  THE  LAST  five years, as I write this, more than a thousand AI companies
have popped up around the globe. Only a few of them are likely to make
it big. Most won’t be around in a few years. I asked a prominent investor
how we could possibly spot the winners. He stressed the importance of a
differentiated business model: the ability to offer customers products or
services that stand out from the rest.
That was the secret to the success, more than a century ago, of Ford
Motor Company. At the dawn of the twentieth century, there were more
than a hundred automobile start-ups in the United States alone, and many
more in Europe and Asia. It was an industry, like AI today, with lots of
competitors looking to stand out.
Ford Motor Company was an early winner. Its founder decided to pursue
a high-volume and low-cost strategy. Starting in 1908, the company
innovated advanced assembly lines to produce great volumes of the Model
T at a fraction of the average industry cost. Thousands of customers who
could only dream of a motor vehicle in 1907 were behind the wheel within
a year or two, and millions more would follow.
Henry Ford didn’t know it at the time, but his Model T production
followed the Algorithm almost to the letter. He endlessly questioned the
norms and strictures of the industry. Other automakers, for example, hired
skilled craftsmen to fashion high-quality parts. Ford, by contrast, mass-
produced standardized components. This dramatically lowered costs and
simplified repairs.
Ford relentlessly reduced steps in the manufacturing process and sped
them up by organizing them along assembly lines. This accelerated cycle
time. The standard at the time was 12 hours of labor per vehicle. But it took
only 1.5 man-hours to produce a Model T.
Ford went a step further and pursued as much vertical integration as
possible. The Rouge plant in Dearborn, Michigan, could take in raw iron
ore and produce a car. It still stands today as a manufacturing marvel.
Other auto companies not only replicated Ford’s manufacturing
methods; they also looked for new ways to differentiate. Ford’s crosstown
rival, General Motors, focused on eliminating one of the most difficult and
unpleasant steps of driving: the vigorous hand crank needed to start the
engine. GM replaced it in 1912 with the first electric starter, giving its
growing stable of automobiles, including early models of Buick and
Cadillac, a strong selling point. At the same time, GM’s founder, William C.
Durant, differentiated it from Ford by providing customers with more
choice, offering numerous models, designs, and colors.
If you look at any period of technological transformation, from e-
commerce to smartphones, you’ll see similar patterns. One player upends
the market with dramatic improvements—in scale, speed, quality, or
customer service. Others rush to catch up. Most of them, in this Darwinian
process, either die or are consumed. A few settle into niches that appear, at
least for the moment, to be safe. The winners have a differentiation in their
product and/or business model that creates a moat of protection (even if just
for a short time). That differentiation leads to survival.
That’s why it makes sense to look at the Algorithm not merely as the
formula for achieving hypergrowth and innovation. As we face epochal
change, from AI to the electrification of everything, there are vanishingly
few businesses that can survive, much less thrive, by maintaining the status
quo. In today’s competitive markets, adapting the steps of the Algorithm
amounts to a survival strategy.
This process never ends. Last year’s advances are this year’s norms.
They must be questioned, built upon, replaced, or discarded. Urgency and
accountability are crucial; market awareness is a constant. Each enterprise
is on a never-ending journey of discovery and reinvention. It can be
challenging and exhausting, but also exhilarating.
The advances that come with the Algorithm are for individual
companies. But what excites me the most is what that innovation can bring.
Discovery and greater efficiency can improve life on our planet, fueling
dramatic breakthroughs while increasing wealth and reducing waste. It’s a
survival strategy for planet Earth—a blueprint for creating a richer, more
beautiful, and sustainable planet, even making life here more fun.
Your role? Take what you’ve learned here and apply the Algorithm to
your business, your division, your team. Show the world what’s possible
when you don’t coast but pursue better outcomes each day. I’m cheering
you on!
OceanofPDF.com